GOOD
EVENING EVERYONE AND WELCOME TO
THE JANUARY 6TH MEETING OF THE
ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOLLOWED BY THE PLEDGE
OF ALLEGIANCE
TO THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.
THE REPUBLIC STANDS ONE NATION
UNDER
ONE.
OUR CLARK PLEASE CALL THE ROLE
OF COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
O HERE CONSERVER HARRISON HERE
COUNCILOR WATSON HERE COMES
FROM OUR CUSTOMER DENHA HERE
COMES MURKOWSKI HAD WON HERE
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE COUNCILOR ER
HERE COUNCILOR HERE COUNCILOR
BRIGGS HERE COMES MCCONNELL
HERE WE HAVE A QUORUM MADE THE
MOTION PLEASE TO APPROVE THE
AGENDA MOVE BY COUNCILOR
BURGESS SECOND BY COUNCIL
MEMBER WATSON DISCUSSION OF THE
AGENDA ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSED
THE AGENDA IS APPROVED BY THEIR
COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM OUR
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
ER THANK YOU
KNOW IN THE ABSENCE
OF INTRODUCTIONS WE COME TO
PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME IS
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST
TO SPEAK AT PUBLIC COMMENT
RESERVE TIME ONE NEEDS TO HAVE
SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BY
CONTACTING OUR CITY CLERK
SPEAKERS BOTH HERE AND ONLINE.
WE'LL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK SO PLEASE PAY
CLOSE ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR
CLERK OR THE TIME CLOCK WILL
NOTIFY YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS
OUR REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME HAS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR
TIME'S EXPIRED PLEASE CONCLUDE
YOUR REMARKS AND CEDE THE
FLOOR.
OUR FIRST SPEAKER TODAY IS TOM
STOLLBERG.
>> MR STOLLBERG IS JOINING US
ON ZOOME
MR STUHLBARG PHONE
NUMBER FIVE THREE FOUR GO AHEAD
.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THIS IS TOM STOLLBERG CALLING
FROM OUR OUT IN ANN ARBOR.
>> HAPPY TWENTY TWENTY FIVE THE
YEAR AFTER OUR BICENTENNIAL I'M
CALLING ABOUT THE A3 WHICH
COVERS AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
ELEVEN FORTY BROADWAY THE EVEN
THOUGH I'M A REAL ESTATE
PROFESSIONAL I STARTED IN REAL
ESTATE NEW SUBDIVISION
DEVELOPMENT INCLUDING REZONING
IN MULTIPLE COMMUNITIES.
I'M ALSO A LANDLORD FOR THEIR
NEIGHBOR.
LATER ON WE'LL GET TO AN
ORDINANCE ABOUT LAMBERG AND
FEES SO I KNOW IT HAS ITS OWN
PUBLIC HEARING BUT I'LL JUST
MENTION BRIEFLY THAT I DO
SUPPORT B3 AND THAT MY SMALL
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY
DOES NOT CHARGE ANY FEES NONE.
>> IT CAN BE DONE TODAY IS
JANUARY 6TH.
I'VE BEEN READING AND LISTENING
TO PEOPLE DETERMINED TO REMIND
US OF THE TRUTH ABOUT NATIONAL
ISSUES.
I'D LIKE TO REMIND US ABOUT THE
TRUTH AT ELEVEN THIRTY I'M
SORRY ELEVEN FORTY BROADWAY THE
BIGGEST PRIVATE DEVELOPMENTS IN
SPEARWOOD AND THE CITY'S
BIGGEST AFFORDABLE HOUSING
SCANDAL COPPER REMIND YOU THAT
HAD THE EXACT SAME SAME PLAN
HAVE BEEN APPROVED AS A THE
DEVELOPER WOULD HAVE HAD TO
PROVIDE 93 MORE UNITS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AT THAT
SITE OR ALTERNATIVELY PAY ABOUT
NINE MILLION DOLLARS INTO THE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND THE
SITE WAS ON THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN RECOMMENDED PUTTING BUT
THE DEVELOPER WAS ALLOWED TO
CREATE A STITCHED TOGETHER PUDI
IN DISGUISE THAT SERVED ONE
PURPOSE A CHEAP AND AFFORDABLE
HOUSING DEPT. IN DISGUISE
INCLUDED ELEMENTS THAT DID NOT
MEET THE LETTER OR INTENT OF A
LAW AND IT WAS ONLY APPROVED
AFTER A TWO WEEK DELAY.
GRANTED AND ACKNOWLEDGED FALSE
PRETENSES.
THEY GAVE TIME FOR MAYORAL
APPOINTEE TO BUY AN ADJACENT
PROPERTY WHICH REDUCED THE
NUMBER OF VOTES REQUIRED TO
COUNCIL FROM EIGHT TO SIX AND
THAT'S THE MAYOR AND HIS THEN
ALLIES WERE ABLE TO CHEAT US
OUT OF 93 UNITS OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING BY A VOTE OF SEVEN TO
FOUR.
THAT DEVELOPMENT CAME TO MARKET
DOUBLE THE RENTS THE DEVELOPER
SAID HE WOULD BY THE WAY SO
CITIZENS SEIZED THE CITY AND
THE CITY CHANGED.
ZONING WAS PART OF THE
SETTLEMENT OF THAT LAWSUIT AND
THE RESULTS OF THOSE CHANGES
INCLUDED SOMETHING THAT COULD
HAVE GIVEN US MORE AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AT THAT DEVELOPMENT
WHEN THE FINAL PHASE OF THE
DEVELOPMENT WAS REVISED BUT
THAT NEW LAW CHANGE WAS
SUPERSEDE IT BY CITY COUNCIL
AFTER ONLY ONE YEAR THIRTY
SECONDS THE DEVELOPMENT
POSITIONS OF CITIZENS ONE
OF THE MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN OUR
BACKYARD WAS ACHIEVED THE 93
INCOME QUALIFIED RESIDENTS THAT
COULD GOT CHEATED.
LET'S NOT FORGET THANK THANK
YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BRIAN
GIERINGER
EVERYONE HELLO
COUNCIL AND WELCOME TO COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK.
WELCOME TO THE COUNCIL.
MY NAME IS BRIAN GEHRINGER.
I AM THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF ANN ARBOR FOR PUBLIC POWER
AND IT IS OUR UNDERSTANDING AT
A TUPPY TWO THAT THE PHASE TWO
FEASIBILITY STUDY AGREEMENT
WITH NEW GEN STRATEGIES AND
SOLUTIONS WILL BE TABLED TODAY
IN ALIGNMENT WITH OUR REQUEST.
OF COURSE IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO
KNOW HOW YOU ALL ARE GOING TO
VOTE BUT I AM GOING TO MAKE
COMMENT AS IF MY UNDERSTANDING
IS CORRECT.
I WANT TO EXPRESS DEEP
GRATITUDE FOR THIS DECISION.
I CONSIDER THIS A MOMENT
OF SIGNIFICANT TRUST,
COLLABORATION AND DARE I SAY
REPAIR BETWEEN ADP TWO AND THE
CITY.
I'M CONFIDENT THAT OUR UPCOMING
DIALOGS ON THIS MATTER WILL
CONFIRM THAT BOTH PARTIES ARE
ACTING IN GOOD FAITH AND THAT
THERE IS A PATH FORWARD THAT
EVERYONE FEELS GOOD ABOUT.
I ALSO WANT TO EXPRESS DEEP
GRATITUDE TO THE MANY DEDICATED
A GROUP TO VOLUNTEERS WHOSE
YEARS OF EXPERIENCE HAVE GUIDED
US THROUGH THIS MOMENT AND TO
SO MANY OF OUR SUPPORTERS IN
THE COMMUNITY WHO HEEDED OUR
CALL TO ENCOURAGE A MOMENTARY
PAUSE AT THIS JUNCTURE IT IS
THE COMMUNITY WHO HAS ENABLED
THIS BEST CASE SCENARIO WHICH I
THINK WE WILL NOW JOINTLY
PURSUE AND IT IS EXTREMELY
IMPORTANT THAT IN AN AGREEABLE
WAY FORWARD IS FOUND AND SOON
TO ALL THOSE WHO AGREE WITH OUR
CAMPAIGN TO DUMP DTT AND TOWARD
DEMOCRATIC CONTROL OF OUR
ELECTRICITY WE HAD JOB TO DO
NOT TAKE THIS MOMENT LIGHTLY.
WE DO NOT TAKE THE CONFIDENCE
OF THE COMMUNITY LIGHTLY.
WE INTEND TO MOVE FORWARD WITH
WITH BOTH CONFIDENCE AND SO
THANK YOU FOR TRUSTING US.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THERE
CUSTOMERS IN SOUTHWEST ANN
ARBOR WHO ARE WITHOUT POWER AS
WE SPEAK AND WHO WILL BE THERE
THROUGHOUT THE NIGHT IN THIS
BITTER COLD.
SO THOSE OF US WHO HAVE LIVED
IN WASHINGTON COUNTY A COUPLE
FOR A WHILE REMEMBER A COUPLE
OF WINTERS BACK WHEN GTZ
SUPREME NEGLIGENCE LEFT SO MANY
OF US IN THE BITTER COLD FOR SO
LONG AND THAT SOMEHOW THE
COMMUNITIES AROUND US WITH
PUBLIC POWER FARED MUCH BETTER.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT THE STORM
THAT THAT STORM IS JUST THE TIP
OF THE ICEBERG.
WE NEED TO PREPARE FOR MUCH
WORSE AND THAT PREPARATION DOES
NOT COINCIDE WITH BEING OUR
ELECTRICITY PROVIDER.
THEY HAVE LOST THAT
OPPORTUNITY.
THEY HAVE LOST OUR FAITH IF IS
STILL IN CHARGE OF ELECTRICITY
BY THE TIME A TRULY
CATASTROPHIC EVENT OCCURS THEN
ANN ARBOR WILL FACE THE SAME
FATE AS DID TEXAS AND PUERTO
RICO IN THE RECENT PAST
EFFECTIVELY ABANDONED BY THEIR
PRIVATE POWER COMPANIES AT THE
MOST CRUCIAL LIFE OR DEATH
MOMENTS AND AS A CONSEQUENCE
OF DECADES OF DISREPAIR.
BUT WE CAN DO BETTER HERE IN
ANN ARBOR AND IN MOMENTS LIKE
THIS I DO THINK IT IS PALPABLE.
SO LET THESE ALTERNATE POSSIBLE
FUTURES BE A MOTIVATION FOR US
DURING THIS CRITICAL MOMENT AND
THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH.
>> APPRECIATE IT.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS LAUREN
SARGENT
.
GOOD EVENING.
COUNCIL AND MAYOR TAYLOR.
I AM DR. LAUREN SARGENT,
CO-FOUNDER OF WASHTENAW THREE
FIFTY AND A SUPPORTER OF ANN
ARBOR PUBLIC POWER.
I LIVE AT TWENTY EIGHT FIFTEEN
INVERWAY AND THE THIRD WARD AND
TONIGHT I WANT TO COMMEND YOU
FOR TAKING STEPS TOWARDS A
PHASE TWO FEASIBILITY STUDY
INCLUDING THE PRUDENT STEP
OF TABLING IT UNTIL IT'S REALLY
WELL CRAFTED.
THE STUDY NEEDS TO ASSESS OUR
PROSPECTS FOR MUNICIPAL
ELECTRIC UTILITY FOR ALL OF ANN
ARBOR TO REPLACE DETI.
I LEARNED FROM MY ACTIVE FDR
DEMOCRAT PARENTS THAT THAT
WHICH IS UNIVERSAL AND
COMPREHENSIVE IS INHERENTLY
MORE JUST AND EQUITABLE
ELECTRICITY WHICH IS
INCREASINGLY ESSENTIAL SHOULD
NOT BE A COMMODITY FULL STOP.
>> WE ARE PLEASED THAT YOU ARE
TAKING THE NEXT STEPS TO
CAREFULLY AND FULLY ASSESS THE
COSTS OF MUNICIPAL ISING
INCLUDING THE MORE DIFFICULT TO
MEASURE FACTORS OF GOING
CONCERN AND STRANDED ASSETS.
WE NEED GOOD RELIABLE NUMBERS
TO BEST POSITION THIS COMMUNITY
TO TAKE CONTROL OF OUR ENERGY
FUTURE AT A TIME WHEN THE
OLIGARCHS AND THE ROBBER BARONS
ARE RUBBING THEIR HANDS WITH
GLEE AS THEY PREPARE TO
EVISCERATE THE REMNANTS OF THE
NEW DEAL.
IT IS MORE IMPORTANT THAN EVER
THAT THIS COMMUNITY TAKE THE
POWER THAT WE CAN INTO OUR OWN
HANDS LITERALLY IN LINE WITH
OUR CLIMATE AND JUSTICE GOALS
AND WE LOOK FORWARD TO
CONTINUED COLLABORATION.
>> THANK YOU VERY THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS GREG
WOODRING
.
>> THANK YOU COUNCIL.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
MY NAME IS GREG WOODRING.
>> I AM THE PRESIDENT OF ANN
ARBOR FOR PUBLIC POWER.
I'M ONCE AGAIN HERE TO EXTEND
MY GRATITUDE FOR THE
COLLABORATION THAT YOU ALL HAVE
SHOWN AND NAVIGATING THIS
DIFFICULT SITUATION THE AMOUNT
OF MONEY THAT THIS COUNCIL HAS
PUT FORWARD FOR THE PHASE TWO
MUNIS PLAYSTATION FEASIBILITY
STUDY IS VERY IMPRESSIVE AND
IT'S VERY WELL RECEIVED.
WE VERY MUCH APPRECIATE THE
SERIOUSNESS WITH WHICH THIS
COUNCIL IS PURSUING THIS
ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY PROJECT
OF MOVING AWAY FROM DTT AND
TOWARDS DEMOCRATIC OWNERSHIP
OF OUR GOVERNMENT OF OUR POWER.
WE SIMPLY WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT ALL OF THE ISSUES ARE WELL
TAKEN CARE OF BY THE TIME WE
GET TO TWENTY TWENTY SIX NOBODY
WANTS TO BE SUCH A LARGE
INVESTMENT AND PUT US INTO NOT
THE BEST POSSIBLE SCENARIO TO
MAKE SURE THAT THIS IS A
SUCCESS IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX IF
YOU REMEMBER THE PHASE ONE
FEASIBILITY STUDY YOU'LL
REMEMBER THAT THE ENGINEERING
ESTIMATE WAS PRETTY MUCH THE
SAME ACROSS ALL DIFFERENT
SCENARIOS AROUND TWO HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLARS WHEREAS
STRANDED COSTS AND GOING
CONCERN RANGED FROM EIGHTY
EIGHT ONE HUNDRED MILLION
DOLLARS.
THE LARGEST FACTOR OF THE
UNCERTAINTY OF THE STUDY ARE
AROUND THESE TWO COSTS AND AS
WE UNDERSTAND IT TODAY, WELL
ONE POINT SEVEN MILLION DOLLARS
ARE GOING TO THIS STUDY.
ONLY THIRTY SEVEN THOUSAND ARE
GOING TOWARDS INVESTIGATING
THOSE QUESTIONS.
WE UNDERSTAND THAT THERE'S
DIFFERENCES OF OPINION THAT
MAYBE THAT NEED TO BE RESOLVED
ON THE BEST WAY TO PURSUE
ANSWERING THOSE QUESTIONS.
HOWEVER, IT DOES RAISE
SIGNIFICANT CONCERN FOR US AND
SO THAT IS THE SOURCE OF OUR
ANXIETIES AND WE HOPE THAT
TOGETHER WE'LL BE ABLE TO WORK
THROUGH THESE AND MOVE THIS
FORWARD QUICKLY SO THAT WE CAN
GET THE ANSWERS WE NEED AND
MOVE FORWARD IN THE BEST
POSSIBLE SCENARIO.
>> SO THANK YOU ALL VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS KEN GERBER
.
THANKS FOR YOUR TIME, KEN
GARBER.
SECOND WORD NICE TO BE HERE
WITH YOU TONIGHT.
LIKE SERGEANT MR. WOODRING AND
MR. GEHRINGER I'M GOING TO
SPEAK ON THE NEW GEN PROPOSAL A
FEW TECHNICAL POINTS TO ADD TO
WHAT YOU'VE JUST HEARD.
I THINK WE'RE FINE WITH NEW GEN
DELIVERING THREE SEPARATE
EVALUATIONS USING BOOK VALUE
OUR SHIELD AND INCOME BASED ON
THE FIELD SURVEY.
BUT AS MR. WOODRING'S SAID, THE
PROBLEM ARISES WHEN IT COMES TO
CONSIDERING THE INTANGIBLE
COSTS AND THERE'S THERE'S
SIMPLY NOWHERE CLOSE TO
SUFFICIENT FUNDING IN THIS IN
THE STUDY TO DEALING WITH ALL
THE OUTSTANDING LEGAL QUESTIONS
AROUND THOSE NEW GEN CAN'T DO
ANY MORE THAN LAY OUT THE
CITY'S POSSIBLE EXPOSURE.
THAT BRINGS US NO CLOSER CLOSER
TO ACTUAL EVALUATIONS WHICH IS
THE MAIN PURPOSE OF PHASE TWO
AND COULD ACTUALLY HARM THE
CITY'S POSITION.
>> AND WE'VE BEEN TOLD THE
LEGAL WORK MUST BE DONE OUTSIDE
THE STUDY BECAUSE WE DON'T WANT
TO KNOW OUR STRATEGY.
WE CERTAINLY DON'T.
BUT THE POTOMAC LAW GROUPS WORK
CAN BE SUBJECT TO ATTORNEY
CLIENT PRIVILEGE.
I BELIEVE THAT WOULD PROTECT IT
FROM FIRE TOWARD PUEBLO,
COLORADO DID A FEW YEARS AGO IN
THIS STUDY PHASE TO LEGAL
ANALYSIS BY THE DENVER LAW FIRM
FERESTEN WOULD REMAIN
CONFIDENTIAL.
THE CONCLUSIONS ARE BUILT INTO
THE REPORT AND IT'S IN THE
EVALUATIONS.
BUT THE ANALYSIS IS COMPLETELY
REDACTED.
>> WE CAN DO THE SAME HERE AND
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO BUILD
THE LEGAL ANALYSIS INTO THIS
STUDY BECAUSE IT CAN THEN
INFORM THE VALUATION WHICH
OTHERWISE ARE LIKELY TO BE JUST
AS UNCERTAIN AS IN PHASE ONE
AND WON'T BRING THE PUBLIC ANY
CLOSER TO A REAL UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE COST WILL BE
OF TAKING THIS MEASURE.
>> SO YEAH, SO THIS STUDY ISN'T
IT SHOULD BE SHOULD GIVE US
SOME VALUATIONS BUT IT'S NOT
REALLY DESIGNED FOR THAT.
INSTEAD WHAT WE'LL GET IS WELL
USING THIS METHOD IT COULD COST
ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR OR FIVE
DEPENDING ON ABC DEERY IT WON'T
DELIVER BOTTOM LINE NUMBERS
WHICH IS WHAT THE PUBLIC NEEDS
AS I SAID TRUE ONLY THE COURT
CAN DELIVER A FINAL BOTTOM LINE
BUT THE COURT COURT LOOKS TO
THE CITY TO MAKE ITS CASE.
THE CITY CAN PUT FORWARD AN
OFFER BUT WITHOUT A STUDY TO
BACK IT UP IT WON'T BE WORTH
MUCH IN THE COURT OF PUBLIC
OPINION WHICH IS WHERE THE KEY
DECISIONS WILL BE MADE NEXT
YEAR.
A FEW WORDS ABOUT NEW GEN IT
MADE SOME MISTAKES IN PHASE ONE
WHICH WE DOCUMENTED IN A REPORT
BY CHRIS BISMACK WHICH WE SENT
YOU LAST YEAR AND BASICALLY IT
RAISED SOME POSSIBILITIES THAT
WEREN'T REASONABLE BUILT INTO
ITS VALUATION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS HENRY
HERSKOVITZ.
GOOD EVENING.
OUR HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS LEARN
ABOUT HOLOCAUST HISTORIANS LIKE
RAUL HILBERG AND
DEBORAH LIPSTADT.
WE HOPE THEY LEARN ABOUT
HOLOCAUST REVISIONISTS AS WELL.
THEY NEED TO KNOW A FRENCH HIGH
SCHOOL HISTORY TEACHER NAMED
PAUL FOR PAUL ROSNAY COMMONLY
REFERRED TO AS THE FATHER
OF HOLOCAUST REVISIONISM, HE
WAS A FIRST WRITER TO QUESTION
THE INITIAL ATROCITY REPORTS
COMING FROM INMATES WHO WERE
INTERNED IN THE SAME
CONCENTRATION CAMPS.
HE WAS A FORMER COMMUNIST
COMMUNIST AND LIFELONG
PACIFIST.
HE RESISTED THE NATIONAL
SOCIALISTS AFTER THEY OCCUPIED
PARTS OF FRANCE IN PARTICULAR
HE BEGAN TO PROVIDE FALSE
DOCUMENT TO JEWS WHO WANTED TO
TRAVEL TO SWITZERLAND TO AVOID
THE ANTI JEWISH MEASURES
INITIATED BY THE OCCUPIERS AS A
RESULT OF HIS ACTIVISM, HE WAS
ARRESTED AND DEPORTED TO
BUCHENWALD CAMP UNTIL
LIBERATION IN APRIL 1945.
>> THE CONTRAST BETWEEN WHAT HE
HIMSELF HAD EXPERIENCED IN
BUCHENWALD AND WHAT OTHER
FORMER INMATES PUBLISHED ABOUT
THIS CAMP MADE HIM A CRITIC
OF THEIR LITERATURE.
THE STORIES HE HEARD DID NOT
COMPORT WITH WHAT HE WITNESSED
IN THE CAMPS.
AS AN EXAMPLE, HE CLAIMED THAT
THE CAMP PRISONERS WHO
COLLABORATE COLLABORATED WITH
THE SS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR MANY
OF THE ATROCITIES COMMITTED
THERE.
HE DISMISSED REPORTS
OF HOMICIDAL GAS CHAMBERS IN
BUCHENWALD AND SAID SO IN HIS
BOOK THE LIES OF ULYSSES.
IT IS NOW ADMITTED BY ALL
MAINSTREAM HOLOCAUST HISTORIANS
THAT THERE ARE NO SUCH CHAMBERS
AT THAT CAMP.
ONE OF THE FORMER INMATES AT
BUCHENWALD WAS A MAN NAMED
EUGENE COGGIN WHOSE BOOK THE
THEORY AND PRACTICE OF  WAS
CRITIQUED BY A SENIOR PAUL
DOCUMENTED COGAN'S DISTORTIONS
AND EXAGGERATIONS AND LIES AND
FOR THAT COVID SUED RATS IN
HERE IN A MUNICH COURT AND LOST
THE COURT WROTE PURE SCIENCE
DOES NOT INQUIRE AS TO WHETHER
THE RESULT MAKES THIS PERSON OR
THAT PERSON UNCOMFORTABLE
POWERS INDIA WAS NOT THE
TYPICAL QUOTE HOLOCAUST DENIER
.
HE WAS NOT A FASCIST.
IN FACT HE FOUGHT AGAINST THE
NATIONAL SOCIALIST.
HE SUFFERED HORRIFIC CONDITIONS
AS A SLAVE LABORER IN THE
BUCHENWALD AND DAURA CAMPS AND
BARELY SURVIVED AFTER THE WAR
HE RECEIVED THE HIGHEST
DECORATION THAT THE FRENCH
GOVERNMENT BESTOWED FOR SERVICE
IN THE WARTIME RESISTANCE
MOVEMENT.
OUR STUDENTS NEED TO KNOW ABOUT
PAUL RESENDE, THANK.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ERIC
ZAKHAR
.
MR. ZACARIAS JOINING US ON
ZOOME ZAKAR GO AHEAD.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
HAD TO GO AFTER THE HOLOCAUST
DENIER BUT I WILL DO MY BEST.
>> I WAS CALLING TODAY BECAUSE
WE HAD THE HOME ENERGY REBATE
PROGRAM LAUNCHED LAST YEAR IN
ANN ARBOR AND I THOUGHT IT WAS
A REALLY GOOD STEP FORWARD FOR
OUR COMMUNITY TO HELP US
ACHIEVE OUR CLIMATE NEUTRALITY
GOALS.
>> BUT I RECENTLY FOUND OUT
ABOUT A BUILT IN INEQUITY THAT
A FRIEND ACTUALLY TOLD ME ABOUT
AND IT'S REALLY UNFORTUNATE AND
I HOPE THAT YOU CAN FIX IT.
A FRIEND TODAY ACTUALLY REACHED
OUT TO ME AND SAID THAT THEY
HAD REACHED OUT TO THE CITY
ABOUT BUYING AN EBAY CAN THEY
WERE DENIED THAT THEY WERE
REJECTED THROUGH THE PROGRAM
AND THE REASON THEY WERE
REJECTED WAS BECAUSE THEY LIVE
IN MULTIFAMILY HOUSING AS
WRITTEN THE HOME ENERGY REBATES
FOR THE WHOLE PROGRAM INCLUDING
THE E PROGRAM ARE ONLY
AVAILABLE TO FOLKS WHO LIVE IN
UP TO UNITS OF THE WORK HOUSING
.
SO PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN CO-OPS,
PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN APARTMENTS,
THEY ARE EXCLUDED FROM THE
REBATES.
>> THEY CAN'T GET REBATES OR
INSULATION WHICH THEY PROBABLY
WOULDN'T NEED.
THEY CAN'T GET REBATES FOR A
LOT OF THINGS BUT THEY ALSO
CAN'T GET LIKE REBATES WHICH
SEEMS KIND OF RIDICULOUS.
MY FRIEND ACTUALLY LIVES IN
ARROWOOD COPERATIVE HOUSING.
YOU PROBABLY KNOW ABOUT THAT
NICE COMMUNITY THAT WE HAVE.
IT PROVIDES A COMMUNITY FOR A
LOT OF VERY LONG TERM
RESIDENTS, PEOPLE THAT DON'T
COME AND GO.
THEY'RE VERY KEY AND OVERRATES
AND MANY OF THEM ARE AT OR
BELOW THE MEDIAN INCOME OF THE
AREA AND YET THEY AREN'T
ELIGIBLE AT ALL FOR ANY
OF THESE REBATES INCLUDING THE
REBATE REBATES AS THE PROGRAM
IS WRITTEN IT SEEMS
TREMENDOUSLY INEQUITABLE TO
EXCLUDE THESE RESIDENTS FROM
PARTICIPATING ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE THEY'RE ALL TAXPAYERS,
THEY'RE ALL LONG TERM RESIDENTS
AND THEY ARE EXACTLY THE KIND
OF PEOPLE THAT THIS PROGRAM
SHOULD AND WAS WRITTEN TO
TARGET.
MANY OF THEM WOULD QUALIFY FOR
THE FULL REBATE IF THEY LIVED
IN SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
BUT THEY DON'T THEY LIVE IN
COOPERATIVE HOUSING.
THEY LIVE IN RENTAL
COMMUNITIES.
AND SO I REALLY URGE COUNCIL TO
LOOK AT THIS.
IT CAN'T YOU KNOW, ANYTIME YOU
START A NEW PROGRAM LIKE THIS
FROM SCRATCH, THAT'S ONE OF THE
FIRST IN THE NATION.
IT'S NOT GOING TO BE PERFECT
THE FIRST TIME YOU DO IT.
SO I'D LOVE IT IF YOU WORK
TOGETHER WITH STAFF TO FIX THIS
INEQUITABLE EXCLUSIONARY PART
OF THE PROGRAM SO THAT ALL
OF THAT ARBER COULD PARTICIPATE
IN THIS WONDERFUL PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MR. BARTON
.
>> MR. BARTON
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ALAN HABOUR
.
THANK YOU
AND DARE DISTURB ME WHEN
SOMEONE SPEAKS TO YOU.
>> NO, I MEAN YOU TURN YOUR
HEAD THAT YOU ARE NOT LISTENING
.
THERE'S NOTHING I'VE HEARD IN
HEARING HENRY HERSKOVITZ OVER
SOME YEARS.
NO HOUSE, NO STATEMENT OF FACT
THAT IT IS NOT DOCUMENT.
HE'S NOT A LIAR.
HE'S NOT A DENIER.
HE IS A HISTORIAN WHO'S LOOKING
AT DIFFICULT QUESTIONS IN A
MORE OPEN MINDED WAY THAN THOSE
WHO TURN YOUR HEAD ARE AND I'M
SORRY TO HAVE SEEN THAT BUT
ALSO SEEM TO TURN YOUR HEAD ON
THE VOTE TO THE PEOPLE OF ANN
ARBOR.
WHEN I WAS HERE LAST MEETING ON
THE FIFTEENTH OF DECEMBER WHO
WHEN NEW FUNDS HAD APPEARED I
SAID AS A MATTER OF HONESTY AND
INTEGRITY WHEN YOU HAVE
COMMITMENTS AND FUNDS APPEAR TO
BE ABLE TO PUT THEM IN THE
BUDGET, YOU SHOULD DO THAT NOT
TO PUT THEM OFF AND YOU HAVE
THAT KIND SO THEY'RE NOT
REPRESENTED IN THEIR BUDGET.
THAT'S A BLINDNESS, AN INSULT
IN FACT IN THE FACE OF THE
CAMPAIGN ON THE VOTE OF THE
PEOPLE AS I SAID THEY SHOULD BE
DEVELOPED AS A CENTRAL PARK AND
CIVIC CENTER AS THEY COME AND
MEET.
PEOPLE HAVE SOME PROCESS, SOME
PART IN THE PROCESS THEY SAID
THAT REALLY THE QUESTION ISN'T
ABOUT PUTTING MONEY IN THE
BUDGET.
THE QUESTION IS ABOUT ACTUALLY
RECOGNIZING VOTE OF THE PEOPLE.
THAT'S YOUR RESPONSIBILITY IN
THE OATH YOU TOOK AND YOU
VIOLATED THE PEOPLE SAID GET
THE CARS OFF, TURN THIS AREA
INTO A PARK OPEN TO THE PEOPLE
AND YOU REFUSED TO DO THAT.
WHO ARE THE CITY COUNCIL WHO
PUT A RESOLUTION FORWARD
DIRECTING THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY?
PLEASE TERMINATE SERVICE
PARKING IN THE LIBRARY.
WHY NOT AS DIRECTED BY THE CITY
CHARTER CHAPTER ONE SECTION
FOUR.
THAT'S RIGHT THERE IN YOUR OATH
AND RESPONSIBILITY THAT YOU DID
NOT LOOK AT THESE
RESPONSIBILITIES AS HAVING SOME
INTEGRITY TO YOURSELF IS VERY
DISTURBING.
IT'S A QUALITY OF POLITICS THAT
SAYS SOMEHOW YOU ARE SOME
CONSENSUS KNOWS BETTER THAN
WHAT THE PEOPLE DECIDED.
AND SO WHAT I COME TO CALL
TOTALITARIAN DEMOCRACY YOU LET
THEM TALK WITH AN AGITATOR, LET
THEM ORGANIZE, LET THEM LET
THEM DO THEIR DEMOCRACY.
BUT IN THE END IT WE'LL KEEP
DOING EXACTLY WHAT WE'VE BEEN
DOING BECAUSE WE KNOW BEST AND
YOU APPARENTLY KNOW BEST AS A
CITY CHARTER IS NOT RELEVANT
INDEED.
NOW THE LIBRARY I HEAR ORDERS
FROM THE LIBRARY INTERESTED IN
MY OLD I'M AGAIN.
>> YES, THANK YOU.
>> I WISH YOU WOULD LISTEN.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ALEX LE MR.
LOESS JOINING US ON
MR. LAU YOU
CAN GO AHEAD.
EVENING THIS IS AXLER, SOMEONE
WHO DOES NOT FEEL THE NEED TO
DENY GENOCIDE AND AND WHO IS
CAPABLE OF MAINTAINING A
RESPECTFUL DISTANCE FROM HIS
MICROPHONE CALLING IN TRUMPET'S
ELK VILLAGE AND SPEAKING JAMAD
ABOUT SOME WAYS IN WHICH AND
CONTINUES TO SUBSIDIZE DETACHED
HOUSES OF THE PEOPLE LIVING IN
TOWN HOMES CUT BACK CONDOS AND
AND OTHER FORMS OF MORE
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY HOUSE
.
>> ASTRAZENECA HAS ALREADY
GIVEN A GOOD OVERVIEW OF THE
ISSUE HERE SO I'LL TRY NOT TO
REPEAT WHAT HE SAID.
I DON'T BELIEVE THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT CITY COUNCIL DID
INTENTIONALLY TO SUBSIDIZE THE
OWNERS OF DETACHED HOUSING OVER
THE OWNERS OF OTHER FORMS
OF HOUSING.
BUT THIS IS THE EFFECT THAT THE
CURRENT RESTRICTIONS ON HOME
ENERGY REBATES HAVE AS A RESULT
A MULTIMILLIONAIRE LIVING IN A
3000 SQUARE FOOT DETACHED HOUSE
HAS MORE ACCESS TO FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE FROM THE CITY'S HOME
ENERGY REBATE THAN SOMEONE
MAKING LESS THAN THE AREA
MEDIAN INCOME WHO OWNS THEIR
HOME IN A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT DESPITE THE FACT
THAT THEY WOULD OTHERWISE MAKE
THE INCOME ELIGIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS FOR INCOME
ELIGIBLE REBATES IF THEY OWNED
IN MORE EXPENSIVE HOME SOMEONE
LIVING IN MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING
IS CURRENTLY GOING THROUGH THE
PROCESS OF APPLYING FOR THESE
REBATES IN ORDER TO INSTALL
HEAT PUMPS IMPROVED INSULATION
AND A BIGGER ELECTRICAL PANEL
AND POTENTIALLY BUT BETTER
BATTERY STORAGE.
I'M RELYING ON ON THESE HOME
ENERGY ENERGY REBATES ONES THAT
I WOULD HAVE PREVIOUSLY GOT.
I GOT ON MY MY MY MORE
EXPENSIVE DETACHED HOUSE THAT
WAS ON A LOT THAT WAS TOO LARGE
FOR ME.
>> I THOUGHT I'D FIND IT KIND
OF BORING THAT THAT THE CITY
STILL HAS THESE FAKE TIANA'S
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT HOW PEOPLE
LIVE AND WHO DOESN'T DOES NOT
JUST DESERVE THE CITY'S
FINANCIAL SUPPORT AND IF I
REALLY WANT TO ACTUALLY BE A
CLIMATE FRIENDLY CITY THAT THAT
IS GOING TO BE ON THE FOREFRONT
OF IMPROVEMENTS THAT HAD TO 30
SECONDS ON YOUTUBE BY KING.
IT'S ETC. I THINK IT IS VERY
IMPORTANT THAT WE LOOK AT THE
DAMAGE THAT SAY THAT DETACHED
HOUSING IS DOING TO TO OUR
LANDSCAPE AND ENSURE THAT WE
DON'T CONTINUE SUBSIDIZING THAT
OVER OTHER FORMS OF HOUSING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA?
THANK YOU MAYOR.
I'D JUST LIKE TO ANNOUNCE THAT
COUNCIL MEMBER ADRIAN AND I
WILL BE HOSTING OUR NEXT WARD
THREE COFFEE HOUR ON SATURDAY
JANUARY TWENTY FIFTH AT 10 A.M.
AT YORK ON PACARD WE WILL BE
JOINED BY SPECIAL GUEST ANN
ARBOR FIRE CHIEF MIKE KENNEDY.
>> THANKS COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
ALONG SIMILAR LINES I'D LIKE TO
INVITE WARD TWO RESIDENTS AND
COMMUNITY MEMBERS TO A
LISTENING SESSION HOSTED BY
MYSELF AND COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK
ON SUNDAY, JANUARY 12 FROM
THREE TO FOUR P.M. ET
SWEETWATERS ON PLYMOUTH AND
GREEN HOPE TO SEE THEIR COUNCIL
MEMBER HERE.
>> THANK YOU.
ONCE AGAIN.
>> I AM NOT GOING TO LET
HOLOCAUST DENIALISM GO
UNANSWERED IN OUR COMMUNITIES.
SO TONIGHT I'M GOING TO MENTION
THAT THE ANTI DEFAMATION LEAGUE
HAS LONG RECOGNIZED HENRY
HERSKOVITS AS A MICHIGAN BASED
HOLOCAUST DENIER AND LEADER
OF THE ANTI SEMITIC ANTI
ZIONIST ORGANIZATION CALLED
WITNESS FOR PEACE.
>> HIS HOLOCAUST DENIALISM AND
HATE SPEECH ARE DEEPLY HARMFUL
AND REPREHENSIBLE NOT ONLY TO
THE HISTORICAL RECORD BUT ALSO
TO THE ENTIRE COMMUNITY.
>> HIS EFFORTS TO SPREAD
FALSEHOODS ABOUT THE ABOUT THE
HOLOCAUST UNDERMINE THE TRUTH
AND FOSTER DIVISION AND HATRED
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
AND HE'S BEEN DOING THIS FOR
YEARS.
THE IMPACT OF HIS RHETORIC HAS
CAUSED PAIN AND DISTRESS FOR
LOCAL HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS, FOR
THEIR FAMILIES AND FOR THE
BROADER JEWISH COMMUNITY
DENYING SUCH A SIGNIFICANT
ATROCITY DISRESPECTS THE MEMORY
OF THOSE WHO SUFFERED AND DIED
AND ERODES THE VALUES
OF UNDERSTANDING AND COMPASSION
THAT ARE VITAL AND A COMMUNITY
WE MUST CONTINUE TO STAND
FIRMLY AGAINST HATE SPEECH
ALTHOUGH WE HAVE TO LISTEN TO
IT HERE.
>> WE CAN SPEAK OUT AGAINST IT
AND WORK TO ENSURE THAT OUR
COMMUNITY REMAINS ONE THAT
EMBRACES TRUTH AND TOLERANCE
AND RESPECT FOR ALL BRACKMAN I
WANTED TO THANK THE PEOPLE THAT
BROUGHT THE BIKE REBATE ISSUE
TO OUR ATTENTION ON THE SIDE
OF THE TABLE.
I KNOW SEVERAL OF US WERE
LOOKING AT EACH OTHER VERY
CONFUSED BECAUSE CERTAINLY THAT
WAS NOT MY INTENT AND I WILL BE
FOLLOWING UP ON THAT.
>> SO THANK YOU ALSO ON A
SIMILAR THEME I WANTED TO LET
PEOPLE KNOW ABOUT THE CONQUER
THE COLD TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
CHALLENGE.
THIS IS A CHANCE FOR YOU TO
CHALLENGE YOURSELF TO TRACK
TRIPS THERE AND A SINGLE
OCCUPANCY VEHICLE SO YOU CAN
TRACK BIKE TRIPS, WALKING
TRIPS, BUS TRIPS,
TELECOMMUTING, CARPOOLING THIS
WINTER AND YOU CAN GET A LOT
OF PRIZES AND HAVE GOOD WORD
COMPETITION AND I INTEND FOR
WORLD WAR TO BE VICTORIOUS.
SO THIS IS GOING TO BE RUNNING
FROM JANUARY 20TH TO FEBRUARY
20TH.
THERE'S ALSO GOING TO BE A
SOCIAL SCIENCE FLYING UP.
THERE'S GOING TO BE A SOCIAL
KICK OFF.
YOU CAN RSVP TO JUST GO TO GET
DOWNTOWN DOT GEE THANKS.
>> YOU ALSO HAVE A BRIGS.
I APPRECIATE WHAT MY PREVIOUS
COLLEAGUES HAVE MENTIONED
EXCEPT FOR THE FACT THAT I
WOULD JUST LIKE TO SUGGEST THAT
PAST PRESIDENT DOES NOT SHOW
THAT WORD FOR WAS VICTORIOUS
WARD FIVE WAS THAT I WELCOME
THE COMPETITION FROM ALL WARD
COLLEAGUES THIS YEAR AGAIN
COUNCILOR CORNU THANK YOU TO
COUNCIL MEMBER AGYEMAN AND
BRIGS FOR BRINGING THAT UP
BECAUSE I WAS GOING TO ALSO
WANTED TO NOTE FOR MY TWO
CHILDREN AT HOME THAT I DID USE
THE HOT DOG HANDS SO I WON ON
THAT ONE AND I WANTED TO LET
FOLKS KNOW THAT THERE ARE FOR
ANYBODY WHO WANTS TO USE A
PARKING LOT FOR A PRIVATE
EVENT, THERE IS A PERMIT
PROCESS FOR THAT.
IT'S AVAILABLE THROUGH THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.
ANYBODY IS WELCOME TO USE IT.
YOU JUST DO NEED TO APPLY FOR A
PERMIT TO DO THAT.
I HAVE EXPERIENCE DOING THAT
THROUGH SPARKE FOR SEVERAL
YEARS.
THERE'S NO REASON WHY YOU CAN'T
USE THOSE PARKING LOTS OR AT
LEAST APPLY FOR THEM IF YOU DID
WANT TO HAVE A LARGER EVENT IN
THE SPACE AND I WANTED TO NOTE
THAT THAT PERMITTING PROCESS IS
DIFFERENT THAN IF YOU WANT TO
USE A CITY PARK SO THAT PERMIT
IS AVAILABLE NOT THROUGH THE
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
BUT THROUGH THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR WEBSITE, THE PARKS
DEPARTMENT PAGE.
YOU CAN FIND THE PERMIT FOR
THAT.
SO TWO DIFFERENT USES A PARK
AND A PARKING LOT IN TWO
DIFFERENT WAYS TO RESERVE THE
SPACES.
>> THANK YOU.
FURTHER COMMUNICATION FROM
COUNCIL I WOULD LIKE TO REQUEST
CONFIRMATION FOLLOWING
APPOINTMENTS ARE PRESENTED TO
COUNCIL ON DECEMBER 16, 2024 TO
THE RENTERS COMMISSION CHRIS
BODY TO THE COMMISSION ON
DISABILITY ISSUES ANEKA CONRAD
I HAVE A MOTION PLEASE MOVE BY
YOUR DENHA SECOND BY COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH DISCUSSION FAVOR
POST IT IS APPROVED.
I WOULD LIKE TO RECOMMEND THE
FOLLOWING NOMINATIONS FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RACHEL JACOBSSON AND APRIL
CONWAY WE HAVE BEFORE US THE
CONSENT AGENDA MOTION PLEASE TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA BY COUNTY
MCCONNELL SECOND BY COUNTY
MEMBER BRINGS DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S I'D
LIKE TO PASS THE A9
FURTHER
DISCUSSION OF THE CONSENT
OF JENNY COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
I'D LIKE TO PULL A JUST BECAUSE
WE'VE RECEIVED A QUESTION OR
TWO ABOUT IT AND IT'S SIMPLE
SO
I'LL CLARIFY IT WITH COUNCILOR
WATSON.
>> I'D LIKE TO COMMENT BRIEFLY
ON SEEI ONE AS ONE OF THE
LIAISON'S TO THE PARK ADVISORY
COMMISSION I JUST WANTED TO
HIGHLIGHT SOME OF THE
COMPLEXITY INHERENT IN THIS
PROJECT AND MANY OF THE
PROJECTS THE CITY THE CITY DOES
THIS IS AN AMENDMENT TO THE
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT
FOR GALLET PARK MUSCLE
RELOCATION AND THE NEW VEHICLE
BRIDGE CONSTRUCTED IN A PARK IS
LOCATED WITHIN A SECTION
OF RIVER CONSIDERED AN M
DINANATH RIVER WITHIN AN HOUR
OR SO IN WATER CONSTRUCTION
IMPACTS POSE A RISK TO THE
FRESHWATER MUSSELS INCLUDING
THOSE UNDER STATE AND FEDERAL
PROTECTION.
THEREFORE THESE ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATORY AGENCIES REQUIRED
THE RELOCATION OF MUSSELS PRIOR
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE NEW
GALLUP PARK VEHICLE BRIDGE AS
PART OF THEIR PERMANENT
REQUIREMENTS.
SO THIS CONTRACT AMENDMENT
ALLOWS THE CITY TO COMPLETE
FOLLOW UP MONITORING REQUIRED
BY THE MACHINE DEPARTMENT
OF ENVIRONMENT, GREAT LAKES AND
ENERGY.
SO I'M GRATEFUL TO PARKS
MANAGER JOSH LANDEFELD AND
PROJECT MANAGER HILARY HANZO
FOR BRINGING THE GALLANT PARK
BRIDGE PROJECT TO FRUITION AND
I'M PROUD OF THE INVESTMENTS
WE'VE MADE AND I WAS MOST
VISITED PARK FURTHER THIS GOT
COUNCILOR GEDLING THANK YOU.
I JUST WANTED TO DRAW ATTENTION
TO CONSENT AGENDA ITEM TWO OUR
RESOLUTION TO APPROVE A
CONTRACT WITH A SHELTER
ASSOCIATION OF WASHTENAW COUNTY
FOR WINTER EMERGENCY SHELTERS
AND WARMING CENTERS.
I JUST WANT TO POINT OUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF RENEWING THIS
CONTRACT.
AS WE ALL KNOW, WINTER IS A
DIFFICULT TIME AND RIGHT NOW
SOME DON'T THAT WE HAVE THE
HIGHEST RATE OF HOMELESSNESS
AND HOUSING INSECURITY IN OUR
CITY AND COUNTY IN OUR HISTORY
WITH AN ALARMING INCREASE AMONG
HOMELESSNESS AMONG OLDER
ADULTS.
SO I ALSO WANT TO THANK THE
DELANA SHELTER FOR SOME OF THE
SERVICES THAT THEY PROVIDE
ANOTHER CONTINUUM OF CARE
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR THE
DISCUSSION ALL IN FAVOR OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF CANINE AND C3
POSED THE CONSENT AGENDA
APPROVED WITH THE EXCEPTION
OF THREE AND C IN LINE WITH
ELEVEN COUNCIL MEMBERS PRESENT
VOTING IN THE AFFIRMATIVE THE
SATISFYING THE EIGHT VOTE
REQUIREMENT WITH RESPECT TO C A
CANINE RESOLUTION TO APPROVE A
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES AGREEMENT
WITH NEW GENE STRATEGIES AND
SOLUTIONS LLC TO COMPLETE AN
ELECTRIC GRID ASSESSMENT
EVALUATION I MEAN CAN STUDY THE
MATTER OF ONE MILLION SEVEN
HUNDRED TWENTY EIGHT THOUSAND
DOLLARS BY COUNCILMAN BRIGGS
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF CNR
BELIEVE THERE'S A STAFF THANK
YOU.
>> I BELIEVE THERE IS A STAFF
INTRODUCTION
.
YES I BELIEVE DR. TOWARDS AN
ATTORNEY JACKSON AVAILABLE FOR
THE STAFF INTRODUCTION
EXCELLENT.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO.
WE RECEIVED THE QUESTION
REGARDING THE NINE TEN STAFF
COMMENT ON HOW WE ARE GOING TO
BUDGET FOR AND TIME THE
APPROPRIATE LEGAL EVALUATION
THAT MUST INFORM WHAT WE PUT IN
FRONT OF VOTERS.
ALSO WHY THIS WORK IS COSTING
ALMOST DOUBLE WHAT WE ESTIMATED
IN RESPONSE STAFF WOULD LIKE TO
SAY THAT THE STAFF COMMITTEE
THAT WILL BE SUPPORTING NEW GEN
STRATEGIES AND SOLUTIONS AND
DELIVERING THE PROPOSED SCOPE
OF SERVICES INCLUDES
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE CITY
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE AS WELL AS
OUTSIDE LEGAL COUNSEL WHICH
WILL HELP ENSURE THAT THE
CITY'S LEGAL TEAM IS KEPT
APPRIZED OF DEVELOPMENTS AND
FINDINGS RELATED TO THE STUDY
SO THE CITY CAN APPROPRIATELY
PREPARE AND STRATEGIZE
REGARDING NEXT STEPS SHOULD A
DECISION BE MADE TO PROCEED
WITH A COMMUNIST POLARIZATION
EFFORT, IT IS LIKELY THAT
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FUNDING
AND STAFF WILL BE NEEDED TO
EVALUATE WHICH ABOUT EXCUSE ME
WHICH VALUATION METHOD TO PUT
BEFORE THE VOTERS AND TO CRAFT
OPTIMAL BALLOT LANGUAGE SO THAT
VOTERS FULLY UNDERSTAND THE
IMPLICATIONS AND COSTS
OF MUNICIPAL CAUSATION.
HOWEVER, BECAUSE WE WILL NOT
KNOW WHETHER CITY COUNCIL WILL
WISH TO PURSUE FORMAL MUNICIPAL
CAUSATION UNTIL AFTER THE PHASE
TWO STUDY THOSE ADDITIONAL
RESOURCES THAT MAY BE NEEDED TO
TAKE MUNICIPAL CAUSATION TO A
VOTE OF THE PEOPLE HAVE NOT
BEEN BUDGETED FOR AT THIS TIME
.
IN TERMS OF THE QUESTION
REGARDING PRICING THE ONE
MILLION DOLLAR ESTIMATE WAS
BASED ON PRELIMINARY
CONVERSATIONS WITH COMMUNITIES
AND CONSULTANTS FAMILIAR WITH
STUDIES OF THIS NATURE AND
HOWEVER, A CITY ONLY RECEIVED
ONE BID IN RESPONSE TO THERAPY
FOR THE PHASE TWO IS
CIVILIZATION STUDY AND THE
FINAL PRICING OF THAT BID IS
WHAT IS BEFORE COUNCIL THIS
EVENING.
EXCELLENT.
THANK YOU.
SO AS FOLKS THE PUBLIC KNOW WE
HAVE LONG BEEN CONTEMPLATING
ARE OUR ELECTRIC OR OUR
ELECTRIC FUTURE AND I'M EXCITED
ABOUT THIS THE PROSPECT
OF STUDY AND THIS PROCESS
ULTIMATELY MOVING FORWARD.
THE QUESTION OF THE OWNERSHIP
OF OUR ELECTRIC UTILITY IS
CRUCIAL TO AN ARBOR'S FUTURE
AND IT WARRANTS PUBLIC
CONVERSATION IN PUBLIC DECISION
MAKING.
ULTIMATELY GOING FORWARD.
THIS STUDY IN MY VIEW THE
PROCESS AND THE STUDY MUST HAVE
COUNCIL SUPPORT AND IT MUST
HAVE PUBLIC SUPPORT BECAUSE
IT'S WELL IT'S AN IMPORTANT
ISSUE AND IT'S A BIG, BIG SPEND
THAT COMMONALITY I BELIEVE WILL
BEST BE BASED UPON A COMMON
UNDERSTANDING OF THE REPORT'S
ROLE AND I BELIEVE THAT THERE
HAS BEEN SOME DEVIATION HERE,
SOME DIFFERENCE OF PERSPECTIVES
FROM FROM OUR PERSPECTIVE FROM
MY PERSPECTIVE, THE PHASE TWO
STUDIES PURPOSE IS NOT TO
ESTABLISH THE COST DEFINITIVELY
BUT RATHER TO HELP FORM OUR
INITIAL OFFER AND CRUCIALLY TO
LATER SERVE AS A TOOL IN
LITIGATION.
THIS DOUBLE USAGE IS
FUNDAMENTAL.
IT'S FUNDAMENTAL BECAUSE
MICHIGAN LAW IS UNCLEAR AS TO
THE METHODOLOGY BY WHICH ONE
WOULD ULTIMATELY CALCULATE THE
VALUE OF DTT ASSETS AND THE
REPORT IS DESIGNED TO ENGAGE
THESE DIFFERENT METHODOLOGIES
AND PROVIDE VALUES ASSOCIATED
WITH EACH METHOD.
IT'S NOT DESIGNED PRESENTLY TO
CHOOSE AMONG THEM.
>> LET'S SAY FOR EXAMPLE THAT
THERE ARE THREE EVALUATION
METHODS A, B OR C THE REPORT
WILL INCLUDE VALUES ARRIVED AT
UTILIZING A, B AND C METHODS
CURRENT DIRECTION IS THAT AS
THE REPORT IS BEING DEVELOPED
WE WILL WELL AS WE HEARD NOW
THERE'S GOING TO BE LEGAL
ENGAGEMENT WITH THE THE PROCESS
AS NECESSARY OR PROPER AND
STAFF IS LOOKING FOR COUNCIL
DIRECTION AS TO WHETHER OR NOT
THERE SHOULD PERHAPS BE A
PARALLEL PATH FOR DEVELOPING
LANGUAGE ASSOCIATED.
THAT'S SOMETHING WHICH I'M
EXCITED TO BEGIN MY OWN WORK ON
ULTIMATELY MOVING FORWARD WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO I THINK IS
USE THE FACTS ARTICULATED IN
THE REPORT TO ARRIVE AT SOME AT
SOME OFFER NO WHY ARE WE
PROCEEDING IN THIS FASHION?
WHY DON'T WE HAVE THE
CONSULTANT OR THEIR LAWYERS
DECIDE ON A METHOD AND THEN GO
FORWARD WITH THE VALUE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THAT METHOD A
PRACTICE THAT WOULD AVOID A
REPORT THAT PRESENTS A NUMBER
OF VALUE, A NUMBER OF DIFFERENT
VALUES, SOME OF WHICH WE WILL
NOT ADVANCE.
WHY DON'T WE JUST ASK THE
CONSULTANT TO ESTABLISH THE
PROPER METHOD AND THEN PRESENT
THAT VALUE BOTH TO THE PUBLIC
AND THE COURT IN ADDITION TO
THERE BEING A A CRUCIAL
PRACTICE OF SEPARATING EXPERT
REPORTS FROM FROM LITIGATION
COUNSEL WE DON'T HAVE THE FACE
TO REPORT SELECT A METHOD
BECAUSE THE METHOD SELECTED BY
THE REPORT COULD BE WRONG.
THAT IS IT COULD BE DIFFERENT
FROM THE METHODOLOGY REQUIRED
BY THE COURT ULTIMATELY IN THE
EVENT THAT THE VOTERS APPROVE
ARE MOVING FORWARD.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, THE PHASE TWO
REPORT ONLY IDENTIFIED THE
VALUE ARRIVED THAT USING A
METHOD B AND THE COURT AGREED
THAT METHOD B WAS APPROPRIATE
THEN IT WOULD BE FAIRLY SIMPLE
WE'D HAVE OUR VALUE, WE WOULD
HAVE THEIR VALUE IN THE COURT
WOULD DECIDE, HOWEVER, IF THE
PHASE TWO REPORT ONLY
IDENTIFIED THE VALUE ARRIVE
THAT USING METHOD B IN THE
COURT CONCLUDED THAT METHOD C
WERE APPROPRIATE, THEN WE WOULD
BE DISARMED AND DEFENSELESS.
THE COURT WOULD REVIEW DTD
METHOD SEE VALUE AND WE WOULD
HAVE NO COMPETING METHOD SEE
VALUE TO COUNTERBALANCE AND
THIS IS AN UNACCEPTABLE
POSITION IN LITIGATION.
IN OTHER WORDS, THE REPORT IS
NOT SIMPLY USEFUL FOR US TO
HELP ESTABLISH A NUMBER FOR THE
PUBLIC TO CONSIDER IS ALSO A
CRUCIAL LITIGATION DOCUMENT
THAT SUPPORTS OUR ABILITY TO
RESPOND TO DTD VALUATION CLAIMS
NO MATTER WHAT METHODOLOGY THE
COURT ULTIMATELY ADOPTS PER
PRIOR.
IT'S MY VIEW THAT THE STUDY
ITSELF IN THE PROCESS HAS TO
HAVE FALLEN FULL PUBLIC BYAN
I'M EXCITED ABOUT THE PROSPECT
OF THAT GOING FORWARD.
>> I'M LOOKING FORWARD TO
ADDITIONAL CONVERSATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO IT AND BUT I ALSO
KNOW THAT THAT TAKES TIME AND
THAT'S NOT WHERE WE ARE TODAY.
>> AND SO ALTHOUGH THERE MAY BE
ADDITIONAL AND I WOULD BE
DELIGHTED IF THERE WERE OR NOT
CONVERSATION HERE AT THE TABLE
ULTIMATELY WILL BE ASKING FOR
I'LL BE ASKING SOMEONE AT THE
TABLE TO TO MOVE TO TABLE THE
THE MATTER FOR FOLKS IN THE
AUDIENCE.
WE DON'T TABLE THINGS VERY
OFTEN WHEN WE DO TABLE A
RESOLUTION THE THE MOTION IS
NOT FURTHER CONSIDERED AT THE
PRESENT MEETING AND THEN AT A
LATER TIME THE RESOLUTION CAN
COME BACK TO COUNCIL UPON A
VOTE OF SIX MEMBERS.
THERE IS NO TIME CERTAIN WHEN
THAT OCCURS.
IT'S MY HOPE THAT THAT WOULD BE
RELATIVELY SOON AS SOON AS A
COMMON UNDERSTANDING COULD BE
ACCOMPLISHED BUT THAT THAT IS
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'D BE
WAITING ON WAITING ON TO OCCUR
.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRIX, THANK
YOU.
I APPRECIATE EVERYBODY WHO CAME
TONIGHT TO SPEAK ON THE SUBJECT
OR TO SHOW SUPPORT.
I KNOW THERE'S BEEN A LOT
OF COMMUNITY ORGANIZING AROUND
THIS AND I APPRECIATE THAT.
I THINK IT'S DEFINITELY
IMPORTANT AS WE MOVE FORWARD
THAT WE ARE MOVING FORWARD IN
ALIGNMENT FROM IN TERMS OF HOW
THOSE AND ADVOCATES IN THE
COMMUNITY AND HOW COUNCIL AND
CITY
STAFF ARE SEEING THIS.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO TAKE THAT
TIME TO DO MAKE SURE THAT FOLKS
ARE ON THE SAME PAGE.
>> I I WOULD SAY THAT THERE ARE
ALSO WHILE THE ROOM IS FILLED
WITH A NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO ARE
VERY COMFORTABLE THE NEXT STEP
OF OF MUNICIPAL THEN I WILL SAY
AS A COUNCIL MEMBER I HEAR ALSO
FROM FOLKS WHO DEFINITELY DON'T
WANT US TO TAKE THAT STEP.
AND SO THE INFORMATION THAT
COMES OUT OF THIS PHASE TWO
STUDY IS REALLY IMPORTANT IN
TERMS OF MAKING SURE THAT WE
HAVE THAT BASELINE
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT TAKING
THIS NEXT STEP WOULD LOOK LIKE
AND TO MAKE SURE THAT WE HAVE
ALL THE INFORMATION THAT VOTERS
WOULD NEED AND THAT COUNCIL
WOULD NEED IF WE TO TO ACTUALLY
TAKE THIS TO A VOTE SO YOU
KNOW, IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
THAT WE MOVE FORWARD CAREFULLY
AND PRAGMATICALLY AND
UNDERSTAND WHAT'S WHAT'S NEEDED
OUT OF PHASE TWO STUDY.
SO I WILL MOVE TO TABLE UNLESS
I SEE SOMEBODY ELSE'S HAND UP
THAT WOULD LIKE TO MAKE A
COMMENT.
OK, I'LL MOVE TO TABLE THIS
SECOND SUPPORTED BY COUNCILOR
CORNHILL.
I BELIEVE THAT THE VOTE TABLE
IS NO DOES NOT TAKE THE BAIT
BUT IT DOES REQUIRE EIGHT VOTES
SO WE'RE OF COURSE OUR CITY
ATTORNEY IS JUST CHECKING UNDER
ROBERT'S RULES OK FROM THE
ROBERT'S RULES STICKLER IN THE
GROUP
I BELIEVE THE PROPER
MOTION WOULD BE TO POSTPONE
INDEFINITELY.
POSTPONING INDEFINITELY WILL
NOT REQUIRE WILL WILL WELL IT
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THAT
KILLS THAT POSTPONE
INDEFINITELY YOUR CORRECT
TABLING SOMEBODY CAN MOVE TO
BRING IT BACK TO THE TABLE BY
TABLING TEMPORARILY AT THAT
MEETING.
>> THAT'S THE DISTINCTION.
SO POSTPONING INDEFINITELY
WOULD NOT REVEAL IT WOULD NOT
ENABLE US TO BRING IT BACK.
>> IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE SAYING?
I'M SAYING IT WOULD HAVE TO BE
BROUGHT BACK AS A NEW MOTION.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE DON'T AS A NEW MOTION BUT A
POINT OF YES.
>> COULD WE POSTPONE DEFINITELY
TO AFTER A SPECIFIC EVENT HAS
OCCURRED?
>> YES.
YES.
SPECIFIC YOU COULD POSTPONE TO
AFTER A SPECIFIC EVENT HAS
OCCURRED AND THAT OCCURRED THAT
EVENT COULD BE A STAFF
RECOMMENDATION ON A WAY TO
PROCEED FORWARD OR HOWEVER YOU
CHOOSE TO VERBALIZE IT.
>> COULD WE POSTPONE IT ALL IF
YOU'LL FORGIVE ME, THE MAYOR
REQUESTED TO COME BACK FOR SOME
ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE
REQUESTED IT TO COME BACK THE
ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE.
>> YES, THAT'S WHAT EVERYONE'S
SAYING THAT THAT'S FINE.
THE ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE
MAY REQUIRE A SPECIAL MEETING
IF YOU KNOW IN ORDER TO DO IT
IN A TIMELY FASHION.
BUT ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE
MEETINGS WILL HAVE NO TROUBLE
WITH THAT I ASSUME.
GREAT.
SO WHAT I HEARD YOU SAY COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG'S WAS INSTEAD A
MOTION TO THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT I
SAID THE FIRST TIME AROUND.
>> YES.
I DON'T KNOW WHY THERE WAS SO
MUCH CONFUSION, A MOTION TO
POSTPONE UNTIL WE RECEIVED THE
RECOMMENDATION THE
ADMINISTRATION COMMITTEE TO
BRING IT BACK TO TO THE TABLE
THAT SECONDED BY COUNCILOR
CORNELL AND THAT'S A MOTION TO
POSTPONE.
SO THAT'S A CONVERSATION PIECE
.
>> IS THERE ANYTHING THAT YOU
WOULD LIKE TO SAY COUNCIL
MEMBER ER I SIMPLY WANT TO
FIRST OF ALL THANK YOU TO OUR
CITY ATTORNEY FOR LOOKING THAT
UP ON THE FLY AND THANK YOU TO
MY COLLEAGUES FOR INDULGING ME
ON THAT.
THE REASON I'M A STICKLER FOR
THIS IS BECAUSE TABLING DOES
NOT ALLOW FOR DISCUSSION
SOMETHING THAT CAN BE ABUSED
AND SO I DON'T THINK IT WAS IN
THIS CASE AT ALL.
>> LET ME MAKE IT CLEAR.
>> BUT I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT THAT WE FOLLOW THE
CORRECT PROCEDURE FOR THAT
REASON FOR LOTS
IS IT
APPROPRIATE TO DISCUSS OK, YEAH
I JUST WANTED TO THROW IN MY
TWO CENTS ABOUT WHAT I'M HOPING
TO SEE BACK BUT I THINK I NEED
TIME TO BETTER UNDERSTAND YOU
KNOW THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT
CHUNK OF MONEY.
IT'S A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF TIME ON TOP OF TIME THAT
WE'VE ALREADY SPENT, YOU KNOW,
SOMEWHAT PURSUING THE LEARNING
MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THIS
PATH.
SO I YOU KNOW, I WOULD JUST
LIKE TO BETTER UNDERSTAND WHAT
EXACTLY CITY COUNCIL GETS FROM
THIS WHAT DECISION POINTS THERE
ARE STILL GOING TO BE BEFORE WE
WOULD PUT SOMETHING IN FRONT
OF THE PUBLIC AND TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE HAD PLANNED ALL OF THE
COMPONENTS WHAT WOULD BE
NECESSARY TO BRING IT TO THE
PUBLIC?
I FEEL LIKE I'M STILL NOT CLEAR
ON THAT AND IT MIGHT JUST I
MIGHT JUST NEED TO READ MORE
DEEPLY OR I MIGHT NEED MORE
INFORMATION.
>> THAT IS WHAT I'M HOPIN FOR
WHEN IT COMES BACK ER
DAVID
Q I
JUST WANT TO CLARIFY WHY WE ARE
SEEING THIS AGAIN IN THE CASE
OF THE OF THE BITCOIN ON BIGMAN
ON BROADWAY PROJECT IT WAS A
CONDITIONAL ZONING WHICH WAS
TIED TO THE SITE PLAN WHICH
DOES NOT HAVE TO HAPPEN BUT IT
MEANS THEN THAT ANY CHANGE TO
THE SITE PLAN HAS TO BE
APPROVED BY COUNCIL AND SO THE
SITE PLAN FOR PHASE TWO WAS
CHANGED IN 2023 TO SHIFT FROM A
TOWNHOME PROJECT TO RENTAL
HOUSING WHICH IS NEEDED AND HAS
BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL AT THIS
HIGHLY WALKABLE LOCATION CITY
COUNCIL APPROVED THAT CHANGE TO
THE SITE PLAN ON JULY 17TH,
2023 AND AT THAT TIME THE
DEVELOPER VOLUNTARILY OFFERED
TO GO BEYOND THE OBLIGATIONS
THAT WERE CREATED IN THE
ORIGINAL PROJECT FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING TO OFFER AN ADDITIONAL
SIX AFFORDABLE UNITS WHICH
RAISES THE TOTAL FOR THAT
PROJECT FROM THE FIFTEEN THAT
HAD BEEN TIED TO THE BROWNFIELD
FINANCING TO TWENTY ONE
AFFORDABLE UNITS.
>> SO WE'RE GETTING SIX NEW
AFFORDABLE UNITS AND THE
AMENDED AGREEMENT FOR OUR
APPROVAL ADDS NOTHING NEW TO
WHAT WE HAVE ALREADY APPROVED
BY APPROVING SITE PLAN IT
MERELY REFLECTS WHAT WE
APPROVED IN THE SITE PLAN.
SO THERE WERE SOME QUESTIONS
THAT WERE RECEIVED AND I WANTED
TO CLARIFY ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
WAS WHAT'S NEW HERE?
AND THE ANSWER IS ACTUALLY
WELL, NOTHING REALLY EXACTLY.
IT'S PROCEDURAL BUT NONETHELESS
GRATITUDE FOR THE SIX UNITS
FURTHER DISCUSSION FAVOR POLLS.
IT IS APPROVED.
WE NOW COME TO A SET OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCILOR COMMUNITY ABOUT THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING TO SPEAK AT A
PUBLIC HEARING ONE NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE BUT
YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS TO SAY
THE SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE AGENDA
TO WHICH THE PUBLIC HEARING
RELATES SPEAKERS BOTH IN HOUSE
AND ONLINE WILL HAVE THREE
MINUTES IN WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU IN
THIRTY SECONDS.
REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR TIME
HAS EXPIRED WHEN YOUR TIME HAS
EXPIRED, PLEASE CONCLUDE
REMARKS AND CEDE THE FLOOR
PUBLIC HEARING NUMBER ONE AN
AUDIENCE AMEND SECTION 5.2 TO
FIVE TO SIX 5.2 EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE FIVE EIGHT THREE ZERO AND
FIVE TWO THREE SEVEN OF CHAPTER
FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
CODE OF TITLE FIVE OF THE
CODE .
THIS EVENT ARBER IS THERE
ANYONE WHO'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS PUBLIC HEARING
?
>> IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WE'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING
?
ER I DON'T HAVE ANY CALLERS ON
LINE FOR US HEARING
SEE NO ONE
THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS CLOSED
PUBLIC HEARING NO TO AN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION TEN
ONE FOUR THREE OF CHAPTER ONE
TWENTY SIX TRAFFIC TITLE TEN
OF THE CODE OF THE CITY BANABA
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING
?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING OUR CLOSE DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT
?
HI THIS IS ALEX.
>> I ALREADY SPOKE ABOUT AT
WHAT KIND OF GENERAL TIME AT
THE LAST MEETING BUT IT DOESN'T
SEEM THAT THE ANY CHANGES HAVE
BEEN MADE REGARDING THE FACT
THAT THE WILL POTENTIALLY CAUSE
PROBLEMS FOR A LARGE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE
WHO DON'T HAVE NON
STREET PARKING OPTIONS
.
>> AND WHILE I UNDERSTAND THE
THE REASON FOR PUTTING THIS IN
I THINK THE LANGUAGE REGARDING
WHAT WHAT AREA MAY BE EXEMPT
SHOULD BE CHANGED, WE CAN BOTH
MAKE MAKE THIS STRICTER IN SOME
CASES FOR FOR EXAMPLE, THERE
ARE BLOCKS THAT CONTAIN NO
DRIVEWAYS WHERE THERE IS NO
NEED FOR STREET PARKING SO WE
COULD ELIMINATE THE TAX THERE
AND AND PREVENT THIS ISSUE FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE REQUIRED TO PARK
INDUSTRY.
THEY DO HAVE TO DRIVE WAYS BY
ON THEIR BLOCKS FROM OTHER
RESIDENCES BY CHANGING IT TO
SAY THAT THE VEHICLE MAY BE
PARKED AT OUTSIDE A HOME THAT
DOES NOT HAVE A DRIVER AND WE
CAN PUT IN SOME ADDITIONAL
REQUIREMENTS ABOUT WHO WHO HAS
IT OR WHO MAY PARK IN FRONT
THOSE HOMES AND IN GENERAL THE
FACT THAT THAT WE'RE USING
DRIVE DRIVEWAYS EXISTING ON THE
ENTIRE BLOCK OF I BELIEVE I CAN
THAT IS SORT OF FINE
FINE-GRAINED AND AND WILL
LIKELY CAUSE THE CITY
ADMINISTRATORS OFFICE A LOT
OF WORK IN GENERATING THAT LIST
OF EXCEPTIONS WHILST ALSO
ATTENDING UP WITH A BUNCH
OF PLACES WHERE THE WEATHER
WOULD NOT BE NECESSARY TO
PROVIDE AN EXCEPTION ALLOWING
SPEECH AND POTENTIALLY CAUSING
DISTURBANCE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
MAYOR.
>> I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER
CALLERS ON THE LINE FOR THIS
HEARING
.
>> SEE NO ONE THIS PUBLIC
HEARING IS CLOSED.
>> PUBLIC ENEMY NUMBER THREE IN
ORDINANCE TO ADD SECTION EIGHT
FIVE THREE TWO TO CHAPTER ONE
ZERO FIVE HOUSING CODE OF TITLE
EIGHT OF THE CODE OF THE CITY
BANABA.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
ALL YOU DO IS WALK WALK ON UP
AND SAY YOU'RE
HELLO MY NAME IS
KEVIN SAYING I'M A RESIDENT
OF WARD FOUR AND ACTUALLY I'M A
NEW RESIDENT.
I'M HAPPY TO HAVE MOVED HERE
FROM MASSACHUSETTS JUST A
COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO TO START
GRADUATE SCHOOL AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND IT'S
BEEN REALLY GREAT TO BE HERE IN
THE CITY AND THANKS FOR YOUR
CONSIDERATION OF THIS
ORDINANCE.
WHEN I WAS MOVING HERE I WAS
ABLE TO HAVE THE FREEDOM TO
CHOOSE HOUSING IN A WAY THAT
WASN'T COERCIVE, THAT WASN'T I
DIDN'T FEEL COMPELLED TO GO
WITH A CERTAIN HOUSE BECAUSE I
PUT DOWN A HUGE KIND
OF INSURMOUNTABLE APPLICATION
FEE AND SO LUCKILY I WAS ABLE
TO SECURE HOUSING.
BUT I KNOW THAT MANY OTHER
STUDENTS, MANY OTHER NEW
RESIDENTS COMING IN TO THE CITY
DON'T HAVE THAT SAME
OPPORTUNITY.
AND SO I URGE THE COUNCIL TO
CONSIDER THIS ORDINANCE,
CONSIDER THIS ADDITION BECAUSE
IT'S REALLY GREAT TO HAVE THE
FREEDOM TO BE ABLE TO PICK THE
RIGHT HOUSING AND EVALUATE
HOUSING OPTIONS ON THEIR
MERITS, NOT ON THE BASIS
OF FEES THAT ARE, YOU KNOW,
UNFAIR THAT ARE IN THE MANY
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS WHICH AS A
GRAD STUDENT I CAN TELL YOU
THAT I DON'T HAVE THAT KIND
OF MONEY SO LET'S KEEP THE CITY
INCLUSIVE AND YES, THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> HIGH IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE
CSG STUDENT HOUSING SURVEY
STUDENTS WERE ASKED IF THEY
WERE CHARGED PRE TENANCY FEES
WITHOUT SIGNING A LEASE AND THE
EXTENT THAT THEY WERE CHARGED I
ACTUALLY WENT THROUGH THE
SPREADSHEET TODAY AND THERE I
SAW A WAITLIST FEE OF ONE
HUNDRED DOLLARS A WAITLIST FEE
OF FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS, A
WAITLIST FEE OF THREE HUNDRED
DOLLARS A DEPOSITOR WAITLIST
FEE AGAIN WITHOUT SIGNING A
LEASE AT FOUR HUNDRED NINETY
NINE DOLLARS A WEIGHTLESS FEE
OF ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
DOLLARS ONE STUDENT WROTE WE
HAD TO SIGN AN APPLICATION FEE
OF SEVENTY FIVE DOLLARS PER
PERSON A PET DEPOSIT OF THREE
HUNDRED DOLLARS QUOTE WE ALSO
HAD TO PAY ABOUT THREE HUNDRED
DOLLARS TO SECURE OUR SPOT.
THE CONTRACTING LEASE WOULD
THEN ONLY BE AVAILABLE TO SIGN
THIRTY DAYS BEFORE MOVING AND
IF WE WANTED TO SIGN A LEASE
SOONER WE WOULD HAVE TO CANCEL
OUR APPLICATION AND LOSE THE
THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS SPOT
RESERVING FEE THAT'S ALREADY
OVER SEVEN HUNDRED DOLLARS IN
FEES ANOTHER APPLICATION FEE
OF THREE HUNDRED FIFTY DOLLARS.
ANOTHER GROUP OF STUDENTS HAD
TO PAY SEVENTY FIVE DOLLARS PER
PERSON AS A WAITLIST FEE FOUR
HUNDRED DOLLARS THREE HUNDRED
DOLLARS ONE THOUSAND LEASE TAKE
FEE BUT QUOTE BELOW DIDN'T GIVE
ME MY SPECIFIC LEASE UNTIL I
PAID THIS TENANT WROTE
LANDLORDS ARE USING LOOPHOLES
YOU NEED TO PUT DOWN
RESERVATIONS MONTHS IN ADVANCE
FOR A PLACE ANOTHER WROTE THIS
IS JUST HOW IT IS THEN AABA AND
THIS IS WHAT PEOPLE DO EVEN
WITH THAT EARLY LEASING
ORDINANCE WAIT LISTS AND WAIT
LISTS FEES WERE SO PREVALENT
THAT YOU HAD TO BE CHANGED ON A
FUNDAMENTAL LEVEL VERY LITTLE.
ANOTHER TRANSFER FEE THREE
HUNDRED DOLLARS.
>> LET US NOT MISS THE ULTIMATE
DRIVING FORCE WHICH ALLOWS THIS
PRACTICE TO CONTINUE IS A
COMPLETE LACK OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING UNITS THAT ADDRESS THE
NEEDS OF THIS COMMUNITY.
HOWEVER, ASKING FOR
TRANSPARENCY IS THE FIRST STEP
IN ALLOWING THE CITY TO TRULY
UNCOVER THE HOUSING CRISIS THAT
HAS BEEN ONGOING IN ANN ARBOR.
IT PROVIDES RESIDENTS OF ANN
ARBOR WITH THE ABILITY TO MAKE
INFORMED DECISIONS ABOUT WHERE
THEY LIVE AND HOW THEY BUDGET.
THIS ORDINANCE SUCCEEDS IN
CALLING OUT THE PRACTICES
OF PRE TENANCY FEES FOR WHAT
THEY ARE UNNECESSARY AND
PREDATORY AS THE GUIDING
PURPOSES OF ANN ARBOR HOUSING
CODE 105 STIPULATES THE CITY
MUST PROTECT NOT JUST THE
HEALTH AND SAFETY OF ITS
RESIDENTS BUT ALSO THEIR
WELFARE PASSIVIST AMENDMENT
WOULD PROVIDE PROTECTIONS FROM
THE CLEAR DANGER OF AN
UNREGULATED HOUSING MARKET THAT
SEEKS TO TAKE ADVANTAGE
OF THOSE SIMPLY SEEKING A PLACE
TO LIVE WHERE I TO AMEND THE
PROPOSAL I WOULD SPECIFICALLY
INCLUDE LEASE TRANSFER FEES
WITHIN SECTION TO C OF EIGHT
FIVE THREE TO INCLUDE
CONSIDERATION OF THE FREQUENCY
THIS WAS BROUGHT UP AS AN UNDUE
PRE TENANCY FEE.
THE EXTENT TO WHICH THESE FEES
FALL ON THE EXTREME END OF FEES
SEEN WITHIN THE SURVEY AND THE
POTENTIAL FOR MISUSE THROUGH
DELIBERATE MISINTERPRETATION
OF THE OPERATIONAL DEFINITION
OF PRE TENANCY FEES AS A CITY
COUNCIL CONSIDERS AND HOPEFULLY
APPROVES THIS ORDINANCE, I LOOK
FORWARD TO ITS FUTURE WORK
ADDRESSING THE ANXIETY INDUCING
COMPETITIVE NIGHTMARE IS
RENTING IN ANN ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU.
HI.
THANK YOU FOR GIVING ME A
THOUGHT TO SPEAK.
I CAME HERE BECAUSE I THINK
THAT THIS ORDINANCE IS REALLY,
REALLY IMPORTANT FOR HOUSING
EQUITY IN ANN ARBOR FROM
PERSONAL EXPERIENCE AND I WAS
MOVING HERE I'M A GRAD STUDENT
RIGHT NOW.
IT WAS REALLY HARD TO FIND
HOUSING JUST BECAUSE I WAS
MOVING FROM OUT OF STATE AND I
WAS DOING A LOT OF VIRTUAL
CALLS.
I DID HAVE A CHANCE TO COME AND
LOOK AN APARTMENT BEFORE
SIGNING BUT BEFORE I DID THAT I
ACTUALLY PUT DOWN LIKE AN
APPLICATION FEE.
WE PUT OUT AN APPLICATION FEE
OF LIKE THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS
BUT YOU REALIZE THAT THE PLACE
WAS LIKE SUPERGRID WE WEREN'T
ABLE TO GET THAT MONEY BACK BUT
THIS IS JUST LIKE AN EXAMPLE
OF SOME OF THE FINANCIAL
BURDENS THAT WE WERE TAKING ON
AS WE TRY TO LOOK FOR A PLACE
TO LIVE.
>> AND I THINK THAT LIKE
LIMITING THE AMOUNT OF FEES
THAT TENANTS WILL HAVE TO PAY
BEFORE THEY ARE LEASING WILL
REALLY HELP IMPROVE EQUITY AND
HELP A LOT OF PEOPLE OUT.
YEAH, I KNOW SOME PEOPLE HAVE
PAID LIKE IN LIKE THE THOUSANDS
BEFORE EVEN LIKE MOVING INTO
THEIR APARTMENT WHICH IS
RIDICULOUS AND LIKE THERE'S
DEFINITELY NO WAY I WAS ABLE TO
AFFORD THAT.
I WAS REALLY LUCKY I HAD LIKE A
COUPLE HUNDRED DOLLARS TO SPEND
THERE AND YEAH SO PLEASE
CONSIDER THIS I THINK THIS IS A
REALLY GREAT ORDINANCE.
YES.
THANK YOU.
>> I THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS JAMES NICKELS WITH
THE WASHINGTON AREA APARTMENT
ASSOCIATION.
I'M HERE TO ADDRESS THE ONGOING
HOUSING CRISIS IN ANN ARBOR AND
THE SIGNIFICANT CONSEQUENCES
SURROUNDING THIS PROPOSED
ORDINANCE THAT WOULD BAN
WAITLIST FEES HOLDING FEES AND
OTHER PRE TENANCY OPTIONS IN 24
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKNOWLEDGE THE
SEVERITY OF THIS CRISIS BY
STATING THAT ANN ARBOR IS TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF BEDS SHORT OF A
SUSTAINABLE RENTAL MARKET IS
CRUCIAL TO EMPHASIZE HOW THIS
ORDINANCE WILL EXACERBATE THE
HOUSING SHORTAGE BY FURTHER
HANDCUFFING LANDLORDS AND
PROPERTY PROFESSIONALS
ULTIMATELY DETERRING DEVELOPERS
FROM INVESTING IN THE
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW HOUSING
UNITS.
THE EXISTING YELLOW ALREADY
CREATES SUBSTANTIAL CHALLENGES
FOR LANDLORDS AND TENANTS BY
SHORTENING THE LEASING MARKET
TO JUST SIX WEEKS BEFORE
STUDENTS LEAVE FOR THE SUMMER
BREAK.
THIS COMPRESSED TIMELINE FORCES
30000 STUDENTS TO FIND HOUSING
IN A CHAOTIC MARKET WHILE
SIMULTANEOUSLY MANAGING THE
DEMANDS OF STUDYING AND
PREPARING FOR FINAL EXAMS.
>> THE SYSTEM IS NEITHER
FRIENDLY NOR SUSTAINABLE.
FOR INSTANCE, IF A RENTER
WANTED TO BEGIN THEIR HOUSING
SEARCH IN NOVEMBER, CURRENT
REGULATIONS REQUIRE LANDLORDS
TO TURN BUSINESSES
AWAY OR TURN
AWAY BUSINESS DUE TO
RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY THE
YELLOW AND WEIGHTLESS OPTION
WILL PROVIDE THESE RENTERS WITH
GREATER CONTROL AND PEACE
OF MIND, ALLOWING THEM TO
SECURE HOUSING BEFORE WINTER
BREAK INSTEAD OF EXISTING.
INSTEAD, THE EXISTING SYSTEM
FORCES THEM TO COMPETE WITH
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF OTHERS
DURING A STRESSFUL SIX WEEK
PERIOD.
ELIMINATING WAITLIST REMOVES A
VALUABLE TOOL THAT EMPOWERS
RENTERS TO PLAN AND MAKE
INFORMED DECISIONS TO
ILLUSTRATE THE BROADER
IMPLICATIONS, CONSIDER WHAT
WOULD HAPPEN IF CITY COUNCIL
SHORTEN THE HOME BUYING MARKET
BY SIX MONTHS.
THIS ARTIFICIAL RESTRICTION
WOULD CREATE A HYPER
COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT DRIVING
HOME PRICES AND PRICING PEOPLE
OUT OF THE MARKET.
THE SAME PRINCIPLE APPLIES TO
THE RENTAL MARKET WHILE
LIMITING THE TOOLS AVAILABLE TO
LANDLORDS AND RENTERS.
THE ORDINANCE INCREASES
COMPETITION, DRIVES UP RENTS
AND WORSENS THE HOUSING
SHORTAGE.
THE RENTERS COMMISSION WAS
ESTABLISHED TO ENHANCE THE
RENTERS POWER IN THIS MARKET.
YET THE ORDINANCE CONTRADICTS
ITS INTENDED PURPOSE BY TAKING
AWAY OPTIONS LIKE WAITLISTS.
THE ORDINANCE STRIPS RENTERS
THE ABILITY TO SECURE HOUSING
EARLIER IN THEIR ACADEMIC YEAR
WAITLISTS ARE NOT PREDATORY.
THEY PROVIDE RENTERS WITH THE
PEACE OF MIND OFFERED UPFRONT
COST THAT IS OFTEN REFUNDED
WITHIN 48 HOURS OF THE RENT OR
DOES NOT SECURE UNIT.
THESE FEES FUNCTION SIMILAR TO
SECURITY DEPOSITS BY ALLOWING
RENTERS TO RESERVE THEIR PLACE
WITHOUT ADDITIONAL STRESS AND
DOES NOT ADD TO THE OVERALL
COST OF THE 12 MONTH LEASE.
THE WASHINGTON AREA APARTMENT
ASSOCIATION BELIEVES THAT THIS
ORDINANCE REFLECTS A
MISUNDERSTOOD MEANING OF THE
RENTAL MARKET AND BELIEVES IN
THE BENEFITS OF EARLY HOUSING
OPTIONS PROVIDED TO STUDENTS.
THE REMOVAL OF THESE OPTIONS
WILL ONLY INCREASE THE STRESS
AND PANIC AMONG RENTERS WHILE
SIMULTANEOUSLY WORSENING THE
SUPPLY DEMAND IMBALANCE THAT
DRIVES UP HOUSING COSTS IF CITY
COUNCIL GENUINELY SEEKS TO
PROTECT RENTERS, IT MUST
CONSIDER THE REALITIES OF THE
MARKET AND WORK TOWARDS
SOLUTIONS AND INCREASE HOUSING
SUPPLY RATHER IMPOSING FURTHER
RESTRICTIONS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
HI MAYOR TAYLOR COUNCIL
NEIGHBORS FELLOW PROPERTY
OWNERS AND MANAGERS.
MY NAME IS JORDAN ELSE.
I'M HERE TODAY AS A PROPERTY
OWNER, MANAGER AND NEIGHBOR
COMMITTED TO WORKING MORE
TOWARD FAIRNESS AND EQUITY IN
ANN ARBOR.
I'M SPEAKING TO EXPRESS MY
STRONG SUPPORT FOR THIS
ORDINANCE, THIS ORDINANCE A
CRUCIAL STEP IN CREATING A MORE
JUST AND TRANSPARENT RENTAL
MARKET IN ANN ARBOR AND I'M
GRATEFUL THAT COUNCIL HAS
CHOSEN TO TAKE THIS ON.
LAST YEAR I WORKED WITH A GROUP
OF RUNNERS WHO LOST FOURTEEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS IN A
NONREFUNDABLE FEE.
THIS ISN'T AN ISOLATED CASE.
WELL, IT IS ON THE HIGH END
OF COURSE I'VE HEARD FROM
DOZENS OF RENTERS AND PARENTS
WITH SIMILAR STORIES
CRITTENDEN'S FEES SUCH AS
WEIGHTLESS FEES, HOLDING FEES
AND OPTIONS FEES ARE NOT ONLY
UNETHICAL BUT ALSO UNFAIR.
THEY PROVIDE LITTLE SECURITY TO
RENTERS WHILE PUTTING THE BULK
OF POWER ON THE SIDE
OF PROPERTY MANAGERS.
THESE FEES FURTHER INCREASE THE
DIFFICULTY IN RENTING FOR THOSE
WITH CRIMINAL HISTORIES, PAST
EVICTIONS AND MARGINALIZED
IDENTITIES MAKING HARDER FOR
FOLKS TO FIND AND SECURE
HOUSING OF THEIR CHOICE.
WAIT LISTS DON'T PROVIDE ANY
CERTAINTY FOR EITHER PARTY.
RENTERS DON'T KNOW WHERE THEY
STAND ON A WAIT LIST DUE TO
FINANCIAL BURDENS.
SIGNING UP FOR MULTIPLE LISTS
IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR MANY THAT
WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE FOR
ME AS A STUDENT.
BANNING PRE TENANCY FEES GIVES
RENTERS MORE POWER AND CHOICE,
ALLOWING THEM TO SHOP AROUND
AND MAKE INFORMED DECISIONS
SOMETHING WE WOULD ALL WANT FOR
OURSELVES IF WE WERE HAVING TO
RENT MORE OVER.
HAPPY RENTERS ARE LONG TERM
RENTERS.
THE BENEFITS EVERYONE IN OUR
COMMUNITY ELIMINATING THESE
FEES WE CREATE A MORE STABLE
AND POSITIVE RENTAL EXPERIENCE.
I APPRECIATE THE WORK THE CITY
IS DOING TO ADDRESS THE HOUSING
SHORTAGE.
LIKE MOST OF US IN THIS ROOM I
WISH IT COULD HAPPEN FASTER
WITH MORE AFFORDABLE OPTIONS IN
THE CURRENT MARKET, LANDLORDS
HAVE LITTLE REASON TO ENGAGE IN
THESE PRACTICES AS CERTAINTY
OF LEASING IS NEARLY GUARANTEED
AS PROPERTY MANAGERS AND OWNERS
WE CAN RUN A SUCCESSFUL
BUSINESS WITHOUT RELYING ON
WAITLIST VS PRETENDED IS IT ALL
I CAN TELL YOU FROM EXPERIENCE
THAT DOING IT ACTUALLY MAKES
THINGS EASIER, CLEANER AND FAR
LESS TIME CONSUMING?
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY OTHER
LANDLORDS DON'T CHOOSE IT.
THE CURRENT SYSTEM
DISADVANTAGES LOW INCOME
RENTERS, STUDENTS AND MEMBERS
OF PROTECTED CLASSES.
BY RESTRICTING THESE HARMFUL
PRACTICES WE CAN LEVEL THE
PLAYING FIELD AND ENSURE MORE
EQUITABLE ACCESS TO HOUSING FOR
EVERYONE.
OUR RENTERS AND NEIGHBORS
DESERVE A MORE FAIR,
TRANSPARENT, SENSIBLE LEASING
PROCESS.
I URGE THE CITY COUNCIL TO
CONTINUE TO WORK IN PROMOTING
FAIRNESS AND EQUITY WITHIN OUR
HOUSING SYSTEM.
I ENCOURAGE FELLOW PROPERTY
PROFESSIONALS TO JOIN THE CAUSE
TO THIS DOESN'T HAVE TO BE
SEPARATE.
WE CAN WORK TOGETHER TO CREATE
A RENTAL MARKET WHERE RENTERS
ARE TREATED WITH DIGNITY AND
WHERE LANDLORDS CAN OPERATE
WITHOUT RELYING ON THESE
UNETHICAL PRACTICES OUR
COMMUNITY CAN INDEED THRIVE
TOGETHER.
>> THANK GOOD EVENING COUNCIL
MAYOR TAYLOR.
CITY STAFF AND NEIGHBORS HERE
TODAY HANDCUFFING LANDLORDS TO
CONCEPTS.
MY NAME IS NATHAN KIM AND I'M A
TENANT AT THE ANN ARBOR WOODS
COMPLEX CLOSE TO THE EAST SIDE
TOWN.
I'M HERE WITH MY FELLOW MEMBERS
AND ORGANIZERS OF THE NRA INTO
THEM TO VOICE MY UNEQUIVOCAL
SUPPORT FOR THIS ORDINANCE
WHICH WILL BRING AN END TO A
MUCH CRITICIZED AND
EXPLOITATIVE PRACTICE USED
DELIBERATELY BY OUR LANDLORDS.
I SELECTED MY COMMENT TO
BRIEFLY DRAW ATTENTION TO TWO
POINTS RELATED TO ITS IMPACTS
AND FUTURE WORK THAT LIES AHEAD
OF US.
FIRST, THIS AUDIENCE IS
DIRECTED TENDENCY TENANCY LOSS
FEES AND THIS DOES NOT ADDRESS
MANY OF THE FEES THAT LANDLORDS
USE TO MANIPULATE TENANTS.
THESE RANGE FROM FEES TO TRASH
FEES, CLEANING FEES, MOVE UP
FEES, MOVING FEES, FINES FEES,
ADMINISTRATIVE FEES,
MAINTENANCE FEES WHICH FEES,
LANDSCAPING FEES, PARKING FEES
AND AS YOU CAN IMAGINE IT GOES
ON SOME OF THESE ARE REASONABLE
BUT MOST OF THESE FEES ARE
ASSESSED WITHOUT ANY ADDITIONAL
SERVICES PROVIDED BY A GIVEN
LANDLORD IN OUR ADDITIONALLY
NOT DISCLOSED THE TIME
OF SIGNING THE LEASE DESPITE
OWNING POTENTIALLY HUNDREDS
OF DOLLARS A MONTH FOR TENANTS
IN RENT, THE EXORBITANTLY HIGH
RENTS THAT ARE PUBLICIZED BY
THOSE ARE DUE TO LIBERAL USE
OF THESE FEES IN FACT EVEN
HIGHER IN PRACTICE.
>> SO WE HAD THE HONOR
OF TENANTS UNION ARE EAGER TO
SEE LEGISLATION FINISHING THE
JOB HERE AND ENSURING TENANTS
CAN LIVE A DIGNIFIED AND
AFFORDABLE AND SENSIBLE LIFE IN
ANN ARBOR.
>> SECONDLY, I WANTED TO SPEAK
BRIEFLY TO THE RAMIFICATIONS
OF THIS ORDINANCE AS IT RELATES
TO LANDLORD RESPONSES AS THOSE
IN THIS ROOM ARE WELL AWARE,
MICHIGAN HAS NO FORM OF RENT
CONTROL AND IN FACT RENT
CONTROL LEGISLATION IS ILLEGAL
AND CAN NOT BE ENACTED ON THE
MUNICIPAL LEVEL THE LANDLORD
RESPONDS TO THIS ORDINANCE
COMPELS ME TO RAISE RENTS OR
EVEN THE FEES ASSESSED DURING
TENANCY TO MAKE UP FOR THESE
LOST THE PARASITIC INCOME FROM
THE APPLICATION PROCESS.
THIS ORDINANCE HAS IMMEDIATE
VALUE IN THE MARKET
MANIPULATION OF TENANCY FEES
WHILE TENANTS ARE SEARCHING FOR
APARTMENTS BUT ULTIMATELY
STRONGER ACTION IS NEEDED TO
CLOSE ALL THE LOOPHOLES THAT
LANDLORDS MIGHT TAKE.
WE NEED LEGISLATION CRACKING
DOWN ON FEES AS A STARTING
TENANCY AND SUPPORT FROM
COUNCIL FOR OTHER FORMS
OF ACTION LIKE TENANT UNIONS TO
NEGOTIATE FAIR RENTS, NO FEES
AND DIGNIFIED LIVING.
WE'RE GLAD TO SEE THE ORDINANCE
BEING DISCUSSED IN A PUBLIC
HEARING AND LOOK FORWARD TO
WORKING WITH YOU ALL TO
BUILDING A MORE AFFORDABLE AND
JUST ANN ARBOR FOR ALL TENANTS
.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
I THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
MY NAME IS SOPHIA.
I AM A FIRST TIME RENTER IN ANN
ARBOR AS WELL AS FIRST TIME
RENTER IN GENERAL.
I WANT TO EXPRESS MY SUPPORT
FOR THIS ORDINANCE.
I RECENTLY MOVED HERE AND I
MUST SAY I WAS REALLY, REALLY
DISAPPOINTED WITH HOW EXPENSIVE
IT WAS TO JUST BEGIN APPLYING
OR TO EVEN BE CONSIDERED FOR AN
APARTMENT UPON PAYING MANY
OF THESE FEES, APPLICANTS
RECEIVE LITTLE TO NO VALUE.
THESE FEES IN PARTICULAR TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF POTENTIAL ENABLE
RENTERS GIVEN THAT THERE ARE
MANY YOUNG RENTERS, FIRST TIME
RENTERS AND STUDENTS WHO ARE IN
A TIME CRUNCH TO ACQUIRE
HOUSING BEFORE THEIR STUDIES
BEGIN.
THESE FEES ARE EXPLOITATIVE AND
EXCESSIVE.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IS AN
ONGOING ISSUE HERE AND
ELSEWHERE.
THIS ORDINANCE IS A STEP IN THE
RIGHT DIRECTION AND I HOPE IT
WILL BE PASSED.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> THANK YOU.
ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL MAYOR
TAYLOR.
>> I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO STAND
UP AND SPEAK IN FAVOR OF THIS
RESOLUTION.
>> THE HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS IS ONE THAT WE ALL KNOW
TOO WELL AND IT IS OFTENTIMES
VERY DIFFICULT TO FIGURE OUT
THE RIGHT TACT IN ORDER TO
ADDRESS IT.
THERE ARE VARIOUS DIFFERENT
AREAS WHERE THERE ARE PROBLEMS
THAT NEED TO BE ADDRESSED.
>> HOWEVER, WE ARE LUCKY IN
SOME WAYS WHEN WE FIND AN AREA
THAT IS SO CUT AND DRY AS THIS
ONE PARASITIC ABUSIVE PRACTICES
BY A SUBSET OF LANDLORDS THAT
ARE PRIMARILY RELYING ON
INEXPERIENCE IN THE RENTAL
MARKET PREYING ON PEOPLE WHO
ARE IN A DISADVANTAGED
SITUATION IS SOMETHING THAT
GOVERNMENT ABSOLUTELY HAS A
RESPONSIBILITY TO ADDRESS THESE
TYPES OF JUNK FEES SHOULD NOT
EXIST, ARE IMMORAL TO BE
CHARGING AND SHOULD BE
LEGISLATED AWAY.
WE'VE HEARD FROM OTHER
LANDLORDS THIS MEETING
EXPRESSING A DESIRE FOR THESE
FEES TO BE REMOVED SO THAT THEY
CAN BE OPERATING ON A LEVEL
PLAYING FIELD.
>> THIS IS IN MY OPINION IS A
NO BRAINER AND I HOPE YOU WILL
MOVE FORWARD WITH THE
RESOLUTION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> HELLO MY NAME IS COME ON I'M
A RESIDENT FOR THREE.
I WANT TO VOICE MY SUPPORT FOR
THIS ORDINANCE AS A RENTER IN
ANN ARBOR I NOTICE THAT IT GETS
HARDER AND HARDER TO FIND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING EACH YEAR.
I ALSO NOTICE THAT THE TENANCY
FEES GET MORE EXPENSIVE EACH
YEAR MAKING IT HARDER AND THE
LAST LEASING ROUND IT COST ME
THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS JUST TO
GET MY NAME ON THE LIST WITH NO
GUARANTEE OF GETTING A LEASE IT
WOULD TAKE MONTHS TO FIND OUT
IF I WAS GOING TO BE WITH OR
WITHOUT HOUSING.
I'M NOT A FAN OF GAMBLING THREE
HUNDRED DOLLARS JUST TO JUST TO
PUT MY NAME ON A WAIT LIST WITH
NO GUARANTEE ON A LEASE IS
ABSURD ON TOP OF THAT THERE
WOULD BE NO GUARANTEE IF I'D BE
GETTING THAT MONEY BACK IF I
WAS NOT ABLE TO GET A SPOT AND
I FOUND IT HARD TO TRUST THAT A
LANDLORD OF ALL PEOPLE WOULD
JUST GIVE MY MONEY BACK JUST ON
BLIND FAITH AND TOTAL ALONG
WITH THE NONREFUNDABLE
APPLICATION FEE COST OF ONE
HUNDRED DOLLARS AND THE
NONREFUNDABLE ADMINISTRATIVE
FEE OF TWO HUNDRED DOLLARS IT
COST ME FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS
JUST TO MOVE INTO MY APARTMENT
.
THAT'S ALMOST HALF A GRAND.
WHAT'S SAD IS I'M NOT THE ONLY
VICTIM TO THESE KINDS
OF PREDATORY TENANCY FEES AND
THE OTHERS HAVE TO PAY MORE.
I ASK YOU ALL TO VOTE FOR THE
PASSING OF THIS ORDINANCE AND
SUPPORT OF THE PEOPLE YOU
REPRESENT AND AS ONE PEOPLE
HAVE MENTIONED BEFORE THAT THE
DEFINITION
OF THE TENANCY FEES
IS MADE MORE CLEAR AND THAT ALL
THOSE LOOPHOLES ARE CLOSED.
WHAT THE REMAINING AMOUNT
OF TIME THAT I HAVE LEFT I WANT
TO THANK THE SPONSORS OF THE
ORDINANCE AND SPECIFICALLY
COUNCIL MEMBERS TRAVIS AND
CYNTHIA AND ROSA NEED ALL
OF THE RENTERS COMMISSIONS FOR
MEETING WITH THE TENANTS UNION
ABOUT THIS ISSUE.
IT TOOK A WHILE FOR US TO GET
HERE BUT I THINK WOULD
EVENTUALLY BEEN LANDLORDS NEED
TO BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR THE
JUNK FEES THAT THEY CHOOSE TO
CHARGE JUST FOR THE SAKE
OF GREED AND THIS ORDINANCE
WOULD HELP US MOVE TOWARDS A
MORE EQUITABLE REALITY
OF LIVING.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU
.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M ALSO HERE TO EXPRESS MY
SUPPORT FOR THIS ORDINANCE AND
SPECIFICALLY I WOULD LIKE TO
TALK ABOUT THE WAITLIST FEES
THAT ARE OFTEN APPLIED WHEN
GOING TO A APPLYING FOR A
LEASE.
IF YOU MAY NOT BE AWARE A LOT
OF TIMES LANDLORDS WILL HAVE
YOU APPLY TO A WAITLIST AND PAY
A FEE PERSONALLY ME AND MY
ROOMMATES LAST YEAR PAID TWO
THOUSAND DOLLARS AND THESE ARE
PAID BEFORE MARCH WHICH IS A
DEADLINE WHICH MEANS THAT
LANDLORDS ARE NOT ALLOWED TO
SHOW THE APARTMENTS WHICH
OFTENTIMES MEANS THAT TENANTS
ARE ESSENTIALLY SIGNING LEASES
WITHOUT EVER SEEING THE
APARTMENTS BECAUSE IF WE GET ON
THIS WAIT AND YOU'RE NOT SIGNED
THE LEASE WE DO NOT GET OUR TWO
THOUSAND DOLLARS BACK.
AND I PERSONALLY LAST YEAR IN
MY HOUSING HOUSING SITUATION
WAS KIND OF ON THE NEGATIVE END
OF THIS SORRY IT'S A LESS THAN
IDEAL SITUATION WHERE
ESSENTIALLY ENDED UP IN A
BEDROOM WITH NO WINDOWS DUE TO
THE PICTURES BEING SOMEWHAT
DECEPTIVE IN THE LANDLORD ALSO
BEING DECEPTIVE.
SO BASICALLY ALL I'M SAYING IS
I LOST MY SUPPORT FOR THIS FOR
THIS ORDINANCE AS TENANTS ARE
BEING FINANCIALLY COERCED INTO
SIGNING THESE LEASES BEFORE
EVER SEEING THEIR APARTMENTS.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN HOUSE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLISHER?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE I'D LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING, MAYOR, WE HAVE A
COUPLE OF CALLERS.
ALEX LOWE, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
I WOULD ABOUT THEM.
I'M GRATEFUL TO HAVE JAPANSE
AND ESPECIALLY MY WORK THREE
REPRESENTATIVE HAVEN'T READ THE
WHOLE THING IN THE SUB AND I
EXPECT IT TO PASS UNANIMOUSLY.
THESE ARE PRIVATE TRUTHY THESE
THAT ARE THAT ARE FRANKLY JUST
THE LANDLORDS TRYING TO FURTHER
EXTERNALIZE THE THE COST
OF DOING BUSINESS IN OUR
RESPONSE TO THAT, THE GENTLEMAN
FROM MAINE CAME CRYING ABOUT
HOW THIS TAKES AWAY BUT IT DOES
NO SUCH THING AS ALL THAT IT
DOES IS PREVENTS PEOPLE THAT
PREVENTS THAT THE PARASITE
LANDLORDS BEING ABLE TO CHARGE
WOULD BE BASED ON WICK'S AS
YOU'VE HEARD THIS IS IN THE
HUNDREDS SOMETIMES THOUSANDS
OF DOLLARS FOR HAVING YOUR
CONTACT INFORMATION PLACED IN A
STORAGE.
>> THIS SEEMS LIKE NOT ONLY IS
A PREDATORY BILL BUT IF THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD USE SOMETHING
LIKE THIS, THE SUPREME THERE
WHAT WOULD THE THAT DESPITE THE
WORD ANSWERS THAT THEY SAID
CALL EVEN AT HOLIER THAN THAT
INSANE FUNDAMENTALISM THIS IS A
BAND-AID THEY COULD OVERRIDE A
MASSIVE GAPING WOUND.
THIS CAN ONLY EXIST BECAUSE WE
ARE IN A SITUATION WHERE
LANDLORDS HAVE SO MUCH POWER
OVER TENANTS AND THEY ARE
BASICALLY ABLE TO GUARANTEE
THAT EVERY ONE OF THEIR UNITS
WILL GO WHAT ONE OF THE MANY
THINGS WE NEED TO ADDRESS THIS
IS FAR MORE HOUSING AND ONE
OF THE WAYS TO DO THIS IS TO
FIX OUR BROKEN EXCLUSIONARY
ZONE ZONING LAWS.
>> SO WHILST THIS IS A GOOD
STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION, IT
IS A BABY STEP WHERE WE NEED TO
BE ABLE TO TAKE IN THIRTY
SECONDS A PLANE TO GET WHERE WE
WANT TO GO.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ, DO YOU HAVE A
COMMENT?
>> HI, THIS IS ADAM SAVAGE
CALLING FROM THE FOURTH WARD.
I WASN'T PLANNING TO SPEAK ON
THIS ORDINANCE TONIGHT BECAUSE
I ASSUMED IT'S GOING TO PASS
UNANIMOUSLY BUT I FELT IT WAS
NECESSARY BECAUSE SOMEONE SPOKE
IN OPPOSITION TO IT.
I THINK THAT'S PRETTY SHAMEFUL
ESPECIALLY THE WAY HE FRAMED
HIS OPPOSITION IS BEING
FAVORABLE TO TENANTS.
THE WASHED AREA APARTMENT
ASSOCIATION OUGHT TO BE ASHAMED
OF THEMSELVES FOR MAKING THAT
ARGUMENT.
WE CAN ALL SEE THROUGH IT AND
IT'S AS RIDICULOUS AS THAT
GUY'S OUTFIT.
LANDLORDS IN ANN ARBOR ARE
CERTAINLY NOT HURTING FOR MONEY
AND THESE FIGURES ARE CLEARLY
UNNECESSARY PREDATORY AND
GREEDY.
THIS ORDINANCE IS ENTIRELY
APPROPRIATE AND IT DOES NOT
BOTHER ME AT ALL THAT IT'S
GOING TO SLIGHTLY CUT INTO THE
PROFITS OF LANDLORDS.
I KNOW IT FEELS LIKE WHACK A
MOLE DEALING WITH ALL OF THESE
ABUSES FROM LANDLORDS BUT WE
HAVE TO KEEP DOING IT UNTIL WE
CAN BUILD ENOUGH HOUSING THAT
LANDLORDS ARE COMPETING FOR
TENANTS AND NOT THE OTHER WAY
AROUND.
>> PLEASE ENACT THIS TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
MAYOR.
I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON LINE FOR THIS HEARING.
>> IT'S OK.
YOU BET.
COME ON UP.
THANK YOU.
>> HI EVERYBODY.
THANK YOU FOR LETTING ME SPEAK
.
MY NAME IS MICHAEL LECLAIR.
I LIVE HERE IN ANN ARBOR AND
I'M SPEAKING TODAY AS A SOCIAL
WORKER AND AS SOMEBODY WHO HAS
EXPERIENCE HOMELESSNESS
PERSONALLY FROM TWENTY TWENTY
TO TWENTY TWENTY TWO.
I WORKED AS A CASE MANAGER FOR
A RAPID REHOUSING PROGRAM THAT
SUPPORTED YOUNG ADULTS, MANY
WITH YOUNG CHILDREN TO FIND AND
MAINTAIN PERMANENT HOUSING.
THIS RAPID REHOUSING PROGRAM
REQUIRED FOLKS TO BE LITERALLY
HOMELESS CAT ONE OR CAT FOUR
AND THEY HAD TO HAVE LOW OR NO
INCOME TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR THIS
HOUSING PROGRAM.
HOMELESSNESS IS REALLY CYCLICAL
AND AWFUL AND IMPACTS PEOPLE'S
LIVES AND COUNTLESS REALLY
DEVASTATING WAYS.
AND I WATCHED AS YOUNG WOMEN
WITH CHILDREN STRUGGLED TO GET
INTO HOUSING AND BLAMED
THEMSELVES FOR FAILING THEIR
FAMILIES AND NOT BEING ABLE TO
FIND A PLACE.
>> I THINK YOUNG ADULTS ARE
UNIQUELY DISADVANTAGED WHEN IT
COMES TO HOUSING BECAUSE THEY
OFTEN DON'T HAVE A CREDIT SCORE
AT ALL EITHER LOW OR NO CREDIT
AND THEN THEY ALSO DON'T HAVE
EXTENSIVE RENTAL HISTORY.
YOUNG ADULTS ALSO HAVE LOWER
INCOMES.
APPLICATION FEES CAN BE FROM 50
TO 100 TO 150 PER APPLICATION
AND DUE TO FOLKS AS CREDIT
SCORES AND INCOMES, PEOPLE
WOULD HAVE THEIR APPLICATIONS
DENIED.
BUT IT'S A NO NUMBERS GAME SO
YOU HAVE TO KEEP APPLYING TO
TRY TO GET INTO A PLACE AND SO
THAT FIFTY ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS
FOR THREE APPLICATIONS THAT
STACKS UP ESPECIALLY WHEN THE
REQUIREMENT IS THAT YOU HAVE NO
OR LOW INCOME.
SO A LOT OF THESE YOUNG FEES
CAN OFTEN LIKE KEEP PEOPLE IN
THE CYCLE OF HOMELESSNESS
HOLDING FEES, ADMINISTRATION
FEES, WAITLIST FEES, MOVE AND
FEES AND OTHER JUNK FEES ARE
PRETTY SIGNIFICANT BARRIERS FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE DESPERATELY
WORKING FOR A BETTER LIFE.
I DID HEAR SOMEBODY ON THE
COUNCIL SAY THAT HOMELESSNESS
IN THIS AREA IS AT AN ALL TIME
HIGH AND SO THIS IS JUST ONE
THING THAT WE CAN DO TO MAKE A
TANGIBLE CHANGE THAT FOLKS HAVE
ACCESS AND CAN AT LEAST HAVE A
FIGHTING CHANCE TO GET INTO
HOUSING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE OR ONLINE WHO WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
?
MAYBE WE DO HAVE ANOTHER CALLER
ONLINE CALL HER AT THE PHONE
NUMBER RUNNING IN FOR ONE EIGHT
CRESTAR TEXT ON YOUR PHONE.
>> GO AHEAD
.
CALL HER THE PHONE NUMBER FOR
ONE COMMENT
THAT THEY BE FUNDED
WITHIN 60 DAYS THAT THE LEASE
IS OVER.
>> THESE CHANGES ADDRESS A
PERSISTENT ISSUE THAT RENTERS
ARE FACING WHICH IS BEING A
FINANCIAL BURDEN BY EXORBITANT
AND OFTEN NONREFUNDABLE FEES.
IT'S A PRACTICE THAT HAS TURNED
HOUSING SEARCH INTO A FINANCIAL
TRAP ESPECIALLY FOR THOSE
ALREADY STRUGGLING.
WE'VE HEARD A LOT ABOUT THAT
TONIGHT AND TO THE LANDLORDS
WHO OPPOSE ELIMINATING THESE
FEES I JUST WANT TO MAKE THIS
CLEAR AS A RENTER, AS A TENANT,
WE DON'T THINK THAT THE EXTRA
FEES SHOULD BE A PART OF OUR
BUSINESS MODEL.
>> IF YOU CHOOSE TO BE A
LANDLORD FOR AN
ANADA, YOU
SHOULD ALIGN WITH THE VALUES
OF THE CITY AND YOU CAN STILL
TURN A PROFIT WITHOUT CHARGING
THESE EXORBITANT WITH OTHER
APPLICATION FEES THE
CONTINGENCY FEES YOU DON'T WANT
TO START PAYING FOR THESE
NONREFUNDABLE APPLICATION FEES
AND MONTHLY FEES TO PROVE THAT
YOUR PROPERTY IS IN DEMAND.
PEOPLE PARK TENANTS TOP RENTERS
GRAVITATE TOWARD PLACES THAT
MAKE US FEEL WELCOME AND NOT
EXPLOITED AS A CITY WE THOUGHT
AND AS A STATE WE TALK ABOUT
HOW WE VALUE YOUNG TALENT AND
TO THE YOUNGER PEOPLE IN ANN
ARBOR AND SEE IT AS A PLACE TO
THRIVE, NOT A PLACE WHERE
THEY'RE FINANCIALLY TAKEN
ADVANTAGE OF BY PREDATORY
PRACTICES.
>> WE ALREADY HAVE AN AMAZING
MEMORY TO EMBODY THESE VALUES
TO TREAT TENANTS WITH RESPECT,
TRANSPARENCY AND FAIRNESS.
THOSE ARE THE LANDLORDS AND
DEVELOPERS THAT WE SHOULD BE
CELEBRATING THE ONES WHO BUILD
WITHIN THE CONSTRUCTS OF OUR
CITY'S VALUES THOSE WHO SEEK TO
UNDERMINE THE SENSE
OF COMMUNITY RESILIENCY THAT
WE'RE TRYING TO FOSTER HERE.
I LIKE TO THINK COUNCIL MEMBERS
WITH DENHA AND HARRISON FOR
CRAFTING WITH ORDINANCE AND
TAKING THE TIME TO SOLICIT
FEEDBACK FROM TENANTS AS WELL
LANDLORDS AND WE THINK THAT
THIS IS A REALLY CRITICAL FIRST
STEP IN THE THE PROCESS
OF MAKING SURE THAT AFFORDABLE
HOUSING IS AFFORDABLE AND
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BECOMES
AFFORDABLE.
BUT I ALSO LIKE TO THINK
COUNCIL MEMBERS WATSON, CORNELL
AND I FEEL LIKE I'M MISSING A
NAME AND SO I'M VERY SORRY IF I
HEAR THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU
, MAYOR.
I DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON LINE FOR THIS HEARING
SEE
NO.
>> IN THIS PUBLIC HEARING IS
CLOSED PUBLIC HEARING NO FOR
RESOLUTION APPROVED NEW FEES
FOR THE PUBLIC SILVER CITY FLAG
RAISED IN THE HOUSE WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING
.
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO'D
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS PUBLIC
HEARING?
MAYOR, I DON'T HAVE ANY CALLERS
ON LINE FOR THIS HEARING
.
SEE, NO ONE IS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE MINUTES
OF THE WORK SESSION OF FEBRUARY
12 PLANNING SECTION OF DECEMBER
NINE AND THE REGULAR MEETING
MINUTES OF DECEMBER SIX TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR MADE EMOTIONAL
PLEAS TO APPROVE THESE OMINOUS
MOVE BY COUNCILOR WATSON
SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
DISCUSSION OF THE MINUTES
OF ONE FAVOR POSED.
>> THE MINUTES ARE APPROVED ONE
AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTIONS
FIVE THAT TWO TO FOUR TO SIX TO
EIGHT FIVE THAT TWO NINE FIVE
THREE ZERO AND FIVE THAT THREE
SEVEN IS CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE OF
TITLE FIVE THE CODE OF THE CITY
BANABA MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF B1 CANTHE
BRITISH HAVE ALREADY EXPLAINED
THIS OR SPOKEN TO IT BUT I WILL
SO I WILL BE BRIEF.
THERE ARE SOME CHANGES TO OUR
FENCE ORDINANCE SO IF YOU'RE
GOING TO PUT UP A FENCE OR IF
YOU WANT TO MAKE YOUR FENCE
MORE OPAQUE YOU'RE ACTUALLY
ALLOWED TO DO THAT BY THIS
ORDINANCE AND YOU SHOULD JUST
HAVE A LOOK AT WHAT I WANT TO
TALK ABOUT IS THE REIMBURSEMENT
PARTS OF THE ORDINANCE WHICH IS
WHAT I SPOKE TO YOU BEFORE AND
ESSENTIALLY THERE IS A MISALIGN
ALIGNMENT RIGHT NOW BETWEEN
WHAT WE WHAT THE CITY WILL
REIMBURSE IN TERMS OF YOUR FEES
AND THE AMOUNT OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING THAT YOU NEED TO
PROVIDE IN ORDER TO EARN THAT
REIMBURSEMENT.
CURRENTLY DEVELOPMENTS WITH ANY
NUMBER OR PERCENTAGE INCLUDING
A SINGLE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
UNIT ARE OFFERED A
REIMBURSEMENT OF FIFTY PERCENT
OF FEES PAID.
THIS ORDINANCE REVISION ALIGNS
THE PERCENTAGE OF THE FEE
REBATE WITH THE PERCENTAGE
OF THE HOUSING.
>> SO HOW MUCH WHAT IS THE
PERCENTAGE OF THE SQUARE FEET
OF YOUR DEVELOPMENT THAT YOU
ARE DEVOTING TO AFFORDABLE
HOUSING?
THAT IS THE AMOUNT OF YOUR FEES
CUT IN HALF THAT YOU COULD HAVE
PAID.
I KNOW THE MATH IS MAYBE A
LITTLE MORE THAN WE CAN ALL
HANDLE IN THIS POST HOLIDAY
FREEZING COLD MOMENT.
SO I'LL JUST GIVE YOU A QUICK
EXAMPLE.
IF YOU HAD A SITE PLANNED FOR
FIFTEEN NEW BUILDINGS INCLUDING
A HOTEL, APARTMENTS,
RESTAURANTS, PARKING STRUCTURES
TOTALING A LITTLE OVER TWO
MILLION SQUARE FEET OF FLOOR
AREA AND YOU WERE DOING SIX
PERCENT OF THAT TOTAL FLOOR
AREA AS AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THE PROJECT WOULD NORMALLY
REQUIRE AROUND ONE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTEEN THOUSAND DOLLARS IN
FEES, WHICH IS NOT QUITE WHAT
YOU HAVE TO PAY TO GET ON A
WAITLIST FOR A RENTAL.
BUT JUST KIDDING THE CURRENT
POLICY WOULD REIMBURSE YOU HALF
THAT AMOUNT ALMOST SIXTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS WHICH IS
REALLY FOR JUST SIX PERCENT
OF YOUR TOTAL FLOOR AREA.
AND SO THE PROPOSED POLICY
WOULD ALLOW YOU TO BE
REIMBURSED THREE PERCENT
OF TOTAL FEES PAID WHICH IS ONE
HALF OF SIX PERCENT WHICH
BRINGS THAT REIMBURSEMENT DOWN
FROM ALMOST ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS TO
THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS 554
SINCE THIS IS JUST SMART POLICY
MAKING AND I DON'T THINK WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE ANY DISAGREEMENT
ABOUT IT BUT GO FOR THE
DISCUSSION ON FAVOR POSED IT IS
APPROVED B TO AN AUDIENCE TO
AMEND SECTION TEN FOR ONE TEN
ONE FOUR THREE OF CHAPTER ONE
TWENTY SIX TRAFFIC OF TITLE TEN
OF THE CODE OF THE CITY THAT
ARBER MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIGG SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER IA DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF B TO COUNCILMAN RUBRICS.
YEAH I JUST WANTED TO
ARTICULATE AS THEY DID LAST
TIME MY SUPPORT FOR MAKING
THESE CHANGES.
>> I THINK WE NEED TO FIGURE
OUT WAYS THAT WE CAN CLEAR OUR
STREETS MORE EFFECTIVELY
FOLLOWING A SNOWSTORM AND THIS
IS SOMETHING THAT PUBLIC
SERVICES HAS BEEN CONTEMPLATING
FOR SOME TIME AND SO I THINK
IT'S IT'S A SMART MOVE FOR US
TO CONSIDER.
>> THERE'S CERTAINLY A PERIOD
OF TIME WHERE EDUCATION WILL BE
A PART OF THIS AS WE KNOW WE'LL
NEED TO TO GET OUR WORD ACROSS
OUR COMMUNITY THAT THAT IT IS
THAT WHEN WE SEND OUT AN ALERT
FOLKS WILL NEED TO FIND WAYS TO
TO MOVE THEIR MOVE THEIR CARS.
I I DID WANT TO ADDRESS ONE
OF THE COMMENTS THAT GOT RAISED
DURING THE PUBLIC HEARING
AROUND ADDING MORE DETAILS IN
ABOUT THE TYPES OF STREET
TYPES.
AND I FOR MY PERSPECTIVE, I
THINK THAT THERE'S ENOUGH
CONTEXT WITHIN THE ORDINANCE
ALREADY THERE'S SECTION ONE
OF THE SECTIONS READS OTHER
STREETS EXEMPT FROM THE ON
STREET SNOW PARKING BAN.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR SHALL
MAINTAIN AND PUBLISH A LIST
OF AND MAP OF THE STREETS FOR
WHICH THE BAN DOES NOT APPLY
BECAUSE OF INADEQUATE OFF
STREET PARKING SAFETY CONCERNS
OR OTHER SITE CONSTRAINTS.
SO I THINK A FAIR AMOUNT
OF DISCRETION IS WITHIN THAT
OTHER SITE CONSTRAINTS.
>> IT ALLOWS US TO YOU KNOW,
FIGURE OUT OH THERE ARE
CERTAINLY SOME STREETS IN
NEIGHBORHOODS THAT WE KNOW THAT
THIS WON'T APPLY TO VERY WELL.
BUT MANY OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
WILL WORK AND OUR ADMINISTRATOR
WILL BE AND PUBLIC SERVICES
TEAM WILL BE ABLE TO COME UP
WITH A PROCESS FOR IDENTIFYING
THAT.
SO I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO
OVERWORK THAT AT THE COUNCIL
TABLE OR THE DISCUSSION COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK, THANK YOU.
I FEEL CONFIDENT THE REQUIRED
TWELVE HOUR NOTIFICATION BEFORE
AND ON ST. SNOW PARKING BAN AND
THE SEVERAL IMPORTANT
EXEMPTIONS AS JUST DESCRIBED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGGS MAKE THIS
POLICY WORKABLE FOR MOST ONCE
YOU COMBINE IT WITH THE
APPROACH OF OUTREACH AND
EDUCATION ON THE ORDINANCE
CHANGE AND MINIMAL ENFORCEMENT
FOR THE FIRST FEW YEARS TO
ENSURE GOOD UNDERSTANDING MEANS
THIS NEW POLICY WILL ACHIEVE
SEVERAL IMPORTANT GOALS
INCLUDING INCREASED SNOWPLOWING
EFFICIENCY, INCREASED SAFETY
DURING A SIGNIFICANT SNOW EVENT
ALWAYS STRAIGHTFORWARD BUT
MINIMAL DISRUPTION FOR
RESIDENTS.
THEREFORE I'M HAPPY TO SUPPORT
.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
ON FAVOR WELL POSED.
IT IS APPROVED B THREE IN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND SECTION PART
AN AUDIENCE TO ADD SECTION
EIGHT FIVE THREE TO OF CHAPTER
ONE ZERO FIVE HOUSING CODE OF
TITLE EIGHT OF THE CODE OF THE
CITY THE NO MOVE A COUNCILOR OR
DENHA SEGMENT COUNCILOR
HARRISON DISCUSSION IS A B
THREE COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
I WANT TO START BY THANKING THE
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO
JOINED US THIS EVENING TO SPEAK
OUT AND SHARE YOUR PERSONAL
EXPERIENCES DURING THE PUBLIC
HEARING.
I ALSO WANT TO AGAIN EXPRESS MY
GRATITUDE TO ALL OF THE
COLLABORATORS WHO MADE THIS
LEGISLATION POSSIBLE TONIGHT,
ESPECIALLY THE RENTERS
COMMISSION, INCLUDING CHAIR
ROSA ANITA RATCLIFFE AND FORMER
CHAIR ZACHARIAH FERA.
I'LL NOTE THAT THE COMMISSION'S
RESOLUTION IN SUPPORT OF THIS
ORDINANCE IS ATTACHED TO THE
AGENDA ON G-STAR.
I ALSO WANT TO THANK THE
HONORABLE TENANTS UNION CITY
STAFF, ESPECIALLY ATTORNEYS
JOHN RICER AND JENNIFER
RICHARDS AND OF COURSE MY
COLLEAGUE AND FELLOW SPONSOR
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON FOR
THEIR THEIR WORK ON THIS.
WE HEARD TONIGHT FROM THE
LUXURY APARTMENT ASSOCIATION
SPEAKING AT LENGTH
INTERESTINGLY ABOUT THEIR
CONCERN FOR TENANTS TONIGHT I
WILL NOTE TENANTS SPOKE FOR
THEMSELVES AND WE HAVE THE
POWER TO PROVIDE A SOLUTION TO
A REAL AND COSTLY PROBLEM
IMPACTING THEM AND SO MANY
OTHER RESIDENTS IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
WHILE TONIGHT'S ORDINANCE DOES
NOT ADDRESS THE PREVIOUSLY
PASSED EARLY LEASING ORDINANCE,
I DO WANT TO BRIEFLY ADDRESS IT
BECAUSE WE CONTINUE TO HEAR
FROM LANDLORDS ABOUT THE
BURDENS ON TENANTS
OF EMPOWERING THEM TO MAKE
LEASING DECISIONS CLOSER TO THE
END OF THEIR EXISTING LEASES.
LANDLORDS COMPLAIN ABOUT THE
LAW CREATING AN ARTIFICIALLY
PASSING PERIOD.
THE REALITY IS THE LAW SHIFTED
WHAT WAS ALREADY AN ARTIFICIAL
AND FORCED LEASING PERIOD FROM
THE EARLY FALL JUST WEEKS INTO
EXISTING CAMPUS LEASES TO MUCH
LATER IN THE YEAR EMPOWERING
RESIDENTS AND TENANTS TO MAKE
MORE INFORMED DECISIONS AND
CLOSER TO THE END OF THEIR
EXISTING LEASES.
THE DIFFERENCE TENANTS NOT
LANDLORDS WERE MOST EMPOWERED
BY THIS CHANGE.
I SPOKE AT LENGTH ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF THIS ORDINANCE AT
THE LAST MEETING.
SO RATHER THAN BEING OVERLY
REPETITIVE, I WANT TO BRIEFLY
FOCUS ON WHO WILL MOST BENEFIT
FROM THIS.
WE HEARD TONIGHT DURING OUR
PUBLIC HEARING ABOUT THE
FINANCIAL BURDEN THAT MANY
OF THESE FEES HAVE ON STUDENTS,
PARTICULARLY THOSE WHO ARE NOT
FROM AFFLUENT BACKGROUNDS.
SOME OF THE MOST EGREGIOUS FEES
ARE BEING CHARGED IN ANN ARBOR
THAT ARE BEING CHARGED IN ANN
TENDS TO DIRECTLY PREY ON
STUDENT RENTERS SEEKING TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF THEIR MORE LIMITED
RENTAL OPTIONS SHOULD THEY WISH
TO REMAIN IN THE NEAR CAMPUS
AREA.
I HEAR REGULARLY FROM STUDENTS
AND THEIR PARENTS ABOUT THE
EXORBITANT COSTS JUST TO BE
CONSIDERED FOR RELEASE.
WE HEARD FROM JUST A FEW
OF THEM TONIGHT.
THESE PRACTICES ARE
INDEFENSIBLE AND UNCONSCIONABLE
AND WE HAVE THE POWER TO END
THEM RENTAL JUNK FEES IN THIS
CASE PRE TENANCY FEES ALSO HAVE
A PROVEN DISPROPORTIONATE
IMPACT ON PEOPLE OF COLOR WHO
ARE NEARLY TWO TIMES MORE
LIKELY TO RENT THAN WHITE
RESIDENTS AND ARE THEREFORE
MORE LIKELY TO PAY THESE FEES
TIME AND TIME AGAIN.
THE IMPACT ON LOW INCOME
FAMILIES IS CLEAR AND
DOCUMENTED, LIMITING THEIR
ABILITY TO APPLY OR EVEN BE
CONSIDERED EMMENTAL MANY RENTAL
PROPERTIES AND ESPECIALLY NOT
AT MULTIPLE RENTAL PROPERTIES
OFTEN FORCING THESE LOWER
INCOME FAMILIES INTO LESS
DESIRABLE LOWER QUALITY HOUSING
.
FINALLY I WANT TO EXPRESS TO
ALL OF THOSE WHO SHARED
CONCERNS TONIGHT ABOUT A RENTAL
ABOUT OTHER RENTAL FEES AND NOT
JUST PRE TENANCY FEES.
THIS IS NOT THE END OF OUR
ONGOING EFFORT TO CRACK DOWN ON
THE MOST PREDATORY LANDLORDS IN
OUR COMMUNITY.
IT IS JUST THE NEXT STEP.
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRIS AND I ARE
ALREADY WORKING WITH ALL OF THE
SAME COLLABORATIVE
COLLABORATORS AND THE RENTERS
COMMISSION TO ADDRESS OTHER
PREDATORY RENTAL JUNK FEES AND
TO PROVIDE TENANTS WITH REAL
RENT TRANSPARENCY HERE IN ANN
ARBOR.
THE FIGHT CONTINUES AFTER
TONIGHT.
FINALLY I ENCOURAGE MY
COLLEAGUES TO VOTE YES.
THANK YOU, COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON.
>> THANK YOU, MAYOR.
I WILL BE A LITTLE BIT
REDUNDANT BECAUSE I WAS UNABLE
TO ATTEND THE MEETING THE LAST
MEETING.
SO I'LL BE TALKING A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHY THIS IS IMPORTANT.
LAST MONTH IT WAS ANNOUNCED
THAT HOMELESSNESS IN THE UNITED
STATES HAS INCREASED BY 18
PERCENT.
THIS IS NOT JUST A STATISTIC.
IT'S A STARK REMINDER OF THE
GROWING HOUSING CRISIS FACING
OUR NATION HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
>> WE CANNOT AFFORD TO STAND
IDLY BY WHILE SO MANY STRUGGLE
TO SECURE A STABLE HOUSING.
THIS ORDINANCE IS ONE STEP WE
CAN TAKE TO ADDRESS THE
BARRIERS RENTERS FACE WHEN
SEARCHING FOR A HOME EXCESSIVE
PRE TENANCY FEES OFTEN
NONREFUNDABLE ARE PREDATORY AND
PLACE THEY JUST
DISPROPORTIONATE BURDEN ON
THOSE ALREADY LIVING PAYCHECK
TO PAYCHECK.
>> THESE FEES FACE FORCED
INDIVIDUALS TO GAMBLE WITH
MONEY THEY CANNOT AFFORD TO
LOSE MONEY THAT COULD OTHERWISE
GO TOWARD ESSENTIALS LIKE FOOD
OR HEALTH OR DAYCARE, HEALTH
CARE, DAYCARE BY CAPPING RENTAL
APPLICATION FEES AT FIFTY
DOLLARS AND REQUIRING REFUNDS
WITHIN 60 DAYS IF NO LEASE IS
OFFERED.
WE ARE CREATING A MORE FAIR AND
TRANSPARENT HOUSING PROCESS.
THIS POLICY ENSURES THAT
RENTERS ARE NOT TAKEN ADVANTAGE
DURING AN ALREADY STRESSFUL
SEARCH FOR HOUSING.
>> BUT LET ME EMPHASIZE THIS
ORDINANCE IS PART OF A LARGER
VISION FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
IN ANN ARBOR WHILE WE WORK TO
INCREASE THE SUPPLY
OF AFFORDABLE UNITS, WE MUST
ALSO ENSURE THAT THE PROCESS
OF SECURING HOUSING IS
ACCESSIBLE TO ALL.
THIS ORDINANCE IS A PRACTICAL
STEP TOWARDS EQUITY AND
ACCOUNTABILITY IN OUR HOUSING
MARKET, REINFORCING THAT ANN
ARBOR VALUES DIGNITY AND
FAIRNESS AS WE FACE A NATIONAL
HOUSING CRISIS.
>> THIS IS HOW WE LEAD LOCALLY
WITH BOLD ACTION ONE STEP AT A
TIME.
I URGE MY COLLEAGUES TO VOTE IN
FAVOR OF THIS ORDINANCE AND TO
CONTINUE PRIORITIZING POLICIES
THAT MAKE HOUSING A RIGHT AND
NOT A PRIVILEGE.
>> THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER
BRAKE'S THANK YOU AND THANK YOU
TO COUNCIL MEMBER OF DENHA
HERSON FOR BRINGING FORWARD
THIS ALONG WITH THE RENTERS
COMMISSION AND FOR EVERYBODY
WHO CAME TONIGHT TO SPEAK OUT
ON IN SUPPORT OF THIS.
I THINK THIS IS A REALLY
IMPORTANT MOVE FORWARD FOR OUR
COMMUNITY.
HAPPY TO CO-SPONSOR AT THIS
EVENING.
WE HEARD A FAIR AMOUNT TONIGHT
ABOUT THE IMPACT ON YOUNGER
RENTERS.
BUT AS WE KNOW THIS IMPACTS
RENTERS ALL ACROSS OUR
COMMUNITY.
I RECEIVED I RECEIVED A NUMBER
OF CONCERNED EMAILS ON THIS
TOPIC BUT ONE IN PARTICULAR
THAT STUCK WITH ME WAS FROM A
CONSTITUENT WHO HAD SENT A
MESSAGE FROM HIS MOTHER WHO IS
75 YEAR OLD WOMAN WHO IS
SEEKING TO MOVE TO ANN ARBOR
AND SHE WAS IT WAS GOING TO BE
REQUIRED TO PROVIDE A SEVEN
HUNDRED AND FIFTY NONREFUNDABLE
WAITLIST FEE WHEN SHE PUSHED
BACK ON THAT AFTER READING THE
INFORMATION ABOUT IT, THE
FAIRLY LARGE PROPERTY
MANAGEMENT FIRM SENT BACK A
MESSAGE ESSENTIALLY TRYING TO
IT WAS A FAIRLY GROTESQUE
ATTEMPT TO MANIPULATE BOTH HER
AND PUT PRESSURE ON COUNCIL
AGAINST REGARDING THE EARLY
LEASING ORDINANCE AND
SUGGESTING THAT THE REASON THAT
THESE FEES WERE NECESSARY WAS
BECAUSE OF THE CHANGES AND
EARLY LEASING ORDINANCE.
WHILE I SUSPECT THAT THIS
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM HAS
DONE THIS REPEATEDLY, I'D LIKE
TO NOTE THAT I HAVE NOT
RECEIVED ONE CONCERNED EMAIL
SINCE WE HAVE ADOPTED THE EARLY
LEASING ORDINANCE FOR A
POTENTIAL RENTER ABOUT THE TIME
FRAME.
WHAT I HAVE RECEIVED NUMEROUS
CONCERNED EMAILS ABOUT IS THESE
PREDATORY WAITLIST FEES.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT FOLKS
SHOULD BE ASHAMED THAT THEY
HAVE BEEN DOING IN OUR
COMMUNITY AND IT'S I'M HAPPY TO
BE SUPPORTING THE CHANGE TO MY
COUNCIL.
NO AKMAN BECAUSE I JUST WANT TO
GO ON A VERY DIRECT WAY HOW
SHOCKINGLY PATRONIZING IT IS TO
WATCH SOMEONE REPRESENTING
LANDLORDS COME IN HERE, HERE
ALL OF THESE RENTERS SPEAK
ABOUT THIS PREDATORY PRACTICE
AND HOW IT IMPACTS THEM AND
THEN SAY NO, IT'S ACTUALLY GOOD
FOR YOU.
>> SO CLEARLY LEGISLATION IS
NEEDED BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO DO IT ON THEIR OWN AS
A YOUNG PERSON IN EAST LANSING,
I WAS SUBJECT TO SOME SIMILAR
PREDATORY PRACTICES WITH WEIGHT
LOSS LIST FEES I BELIEVE A
THOUSAND DOLLARS WHICH WAS
SEEMED VERY MUCH AN
ASTRONOMICAL AMOUNT AT THE
TIME.
I WAS TOLD THAT THEY WERE NOT
GOING TO GIVE IT TO ME BACK.
LUCKILY I GOT SOME GOOD ADVICE
FROM SOMEONE OLDER THAN ME TO
FILE CLAIM WITH SMALL CLAIMS
COURT SO I WAS ABLE TO ACTUALLY
GET IT MEDIATED AND GET THE
MONEY BACK BUT ONLY BECAUSE I
HAD SOMEBODY TELL ME TO DO THAT
SO I THINK IT ALSO PREYS ON
PEOPLE'S LACK OF KNOWLEDGE OR
EMPOWERMENT ABOUT HOW TO KIND
OF FIGHT AGAINST THESE SO
ANYWAY, THANK YOU FOR EVERYBODY
WHO IS WORKING TO THE RENTERS
COMMISSION ADVOCATES AND OUR
COMMUNITY COUNCIL MEMBERS
HARRISON AND DENHA AND I'D LIKE
TO BE ADDED AS A CO-SPONSOR
PLEASE COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON
COSPONSORING THIS ORDINANCE
MEANS A LOT TO ME BECAUSE I'VE
EXPERIENCED THESE FEES HERE IN
ANN ARBOR WHEN I WAS LOOKING
FOR AN APARTMENT AND I KNOW HOW
PREVALENT THEY ARE.
THESE FEES ARE AN UNDUE BURDEN
FOR PEOPLE WITH LOW INCOMES
STUDENTS AND PEOPLE USING
HOUSING ASSISTANCE OR VETERANS
BENEFITS.
THIS IS ESPECIALLY RELEVANT
BECAUSE MICHIGAN JUST BANNED
SOURCE OF INCOME DISCRIMINATION
IN LAWS SPONSORED BY JEFF IRWIN
AND SUPPORTED BY THE ENTIRE
HOUSE AND SENATE DELEGATION
FROM WASHINGTON COUNTY.
THANK YOU TO THE RESIDENTS WHO
CAME TO COUNCIL TODAY TO TALK
ABOUT THEIR EXPERIENCES HAVING
TO PAY FEES AT MULTIPLE
APARTMENTS ON A TIME CRUNCH
JUST ENSURE HAVING A PLACE TO
LIVE.
I ALSO APPRECIATE THE COMMENTS
FROM SOCIAL WORKERS AND OTHERS
WHO HAVE HAD WHO HAVE HAD TO
GUIDE PEOPLE THROUGH THE
HOUSING PROCESS.
AS YOU HEARD TODAY FROM
COMMITTERS, THIS IS AN
INITIATIVE THAT CAME TOGETHER
WITH SUPPORT FROM ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS, THE RENTERS
COMMISSIONERS AND COUNCIL
LIAISON'S COUNCIL MEMBER
HARRISON AND RAY DENHA.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR WORK AND
ADVOCACY ON THIS ISSUE AND I'M
GRATEFUL AS WELL TO THE
ATTORNEYS OFFICE FOR THE CLEAR
LANGUAGE IN THE ORDINANCE.
>> THIS WILL BE AN IMPROVEMENT
FOR RENTERS COUNCIL MEMBER
MALIK.
SOME OF YOU KNOW WARD TWO
BRINGS THE ECONOMISTS TO THE
TABLE.
SO AS SOMEONE WITH A BACKGROUND
IN ECONOMICS IT HAS BEEN A CORE
TENANT OF MY EDUCATION THAT
COMPLETE PERFECT INFORMATION
WHEN MAKING ARASHI DECISION IS
ALWAYS THE BEST CASE SCENARIO
COMPLETE PERFECT INFORMATION IS
OF COURSE RARELY POSSIBLE IN
REALITY, HOWEVER, INCREASED
TRANSPARENCY AS MADE POSSIBLE
THROUGH THIS PROPOSED ORDINANCE
THAT ALLOWS WOULD-BE RESIDENTS
TO COMPARE APARTMENTS TO EACH
OTHER APPLES TO APPLES WITHOUT
IT IN UNCLEAR OR NONREFUNDABLE
PRE TENANCY FEES MOVES US
CLOSER TO THAT COMPLETE PERFECT
INFORMATION SITUATION.
PAYING FOR RENT IS LIKELY THE
LARGEST HOUSEHOLD BUDGET ITEM
FOR MOST RENTERS AND IS ALMOST
CERTAINLY SO FOR YOUNG STUDENTS
IN OUR TOWN ADDING THIS
IMPORTANT ABILITY TO COMPARE
PRICES ACROSS APARTMENTS
WITHOUT UNCLEAR OR STRAIGHT UP
DECEPTIVE FEES ADDS MUCH NEEDED
TRANSPARENCY AND CERTAINTY.
I WANT TO THANK ALL OF MY
COLLEAGUES WHO WORKED HARD TO
CRAFT THIS AGREEMENT AND
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO SPOKE
AND EMAILED ON IT.
I SADLY AM NOT A CO-SPONSOR
OF IT MOSTLY BECAUSE I DON'T
YET KNOW HOW TO DO THAT AS A
NEW COUNCIL MEMBER.
BUT I LOOK I GUESS I'M SUPPOSED
TO JUST ASK SO I'M HAPPY TO
PLEASE ADD ME AS A CO-SPONSOR
BUT EITHER WAY I LOOK FORWARD
TO VOTING IN FAVOR OF IT ALL
THE SAME.
>> THANK CAN ALSO REMEMBER THIS
.
THANK YOU.
I JUST WANT TO EXPRESS
GRATITUDE TO ALL MY COLLEAGUES
WHO'VE WORKED ON THIS AND
SPOKEN SO ELOQUENTLY TO ITS
IMPORTANCE AS
WELL AS HEARING
FROM THE PUBLIC AND THEIR NEED
FOR THIS.
I WOULD LIKE TO BE ADDED AS A
CO-SPONSOR IT'S AS SIMPLE AS
THAT AND AGAIN REALLY JUST TO
RECOGNIZE HOW MUCH WORK THE
RENNER'S COMMISSION HAS DONE
FOR A NEW COMMISSION, IT'S
GOING FULL STEAM AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO SEEING WHAT ELSE IS
ON THE JOURNEY CANCER GARCELON
.
>> THANK YOU, MAYOR.
I ALSO WANT TO THANK YOU KNOW
THIS IS GETTING A LITTLE BIT
REDUNDANT BUT I WANT TO THANK
MY WARD MAIN AND COUNCIL MEMBER
CYNTHIA HARRISON AND ALL THE
OTHER CO-SPONSORS OF YOUR
FRANTASTIC JUST FOR YOUR
FANTASTIC WORK ON THIS.
>> AND I ALSO WANT TO THANK ALL
THE PEOPLE IN THE ROOM LIKE ALL
THE TENANTS AND THE PEOPLE WHO
HAVE JUST BEEN CONSISTENTLY
ORGANIZING LIKE THAT ADVOCACY
MATTERS AND IT SCARES FOLKS,
RIGHT.
WHO ARE ON THE OUR SIDE OR THE
POLICING SIDE WHO COME IN HERE
AND KIND OF JUST SPEW LIES
ABOUT WHY THESE WAIT LISTS ARE
NEEDED WITH HUNDREDS OF DOLLARS
FEES WHICH WE KNOW THEY'RE NOT
.
I'M ALSO YOU KNOW, I'D ALSO
LIKE TO BE ADDED AS A AS A
CO-SPONSOR.
I THINK THAT A YOU KNOW, AN
ORDINANCE LIKE THIS REALLY
HELPS TO MITIGATE THE HARM
OF PEOPLE WHO ARE JUST
NEGATIVELY DISPROPORTIONATELY
IMPACTED ALL THE TIME BY OUR
LACK OF HOUSING IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
>> I ALSO WANT TO HIGHLIGHT
THAT AN ORDINANCE LIKE THIS
HELPS TO EMPHASIZE THE
IMPORTANCE OF US ADVOCATING TO
OUR STATE REPRESENTATIVES FOR
THINGS LIKE RENT CONTROL OR FOR
EXAMPLE FOR THE THERE WAS A
PACKAGE OF BILLS THAT WAS
INTRODUCED TO EMPOWER TENANT
RIGHTS DURING THE LAME DUCK
SESSION.
>> WE DID NOT GET A HEARING
INCLUDING A BILL THAT WAS
INTRODUCED BY REPRESENTATIVE
CAREY RENEGADES FROM ANN ARBOR
THAT WAS TO ALLOW LOCAL
MUNICIPALITIES LIKE OUR OWN TO
DECIDE LAWS ON RENT
STABILIZATION.
SO REACH OUT TO YOUR STATE REP
SAID TAKE THIS ADVOCACY TO THE
NEXT LEVEL.
>> THANK YOU VERY DENHA THANKS
.
>> WELL I KNOW THAT BASED ON
THE COMMENTS TODAY I'M NOT
EXPECTING THIS TO BE OVERLY
CONTROVERSIAL.
THERE IS ONE ITEM THAT I WANTED
TO ADDRESS DIRECTLY BECAUSE
IT'S PROBABLY A PIECE I'VE
RECEIVED THE MOST QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHICH IS THE ONE FEE THAT
IS STILL ALLOWED PRE TENANCY
WHICH THE FIFTY DOLLAR
REFUNDABLE APPLICATION FEE I
WILL NOTE I WAS ACTUALLY
ORIGINALLY IN A POSITION WHERE
I WANTED TO BAN THAT AS WELL
BUT I WAS ULTIMATELY CONVINCED
THROUGH SOME CONVERSATIONS WITH
SOME OF THE SMALLER LANDLORDS
IN TOWN ABOUT THE
DISPROPORTIONATE IMPACT THAT IT
HAS ON THEM.
AND SO THE REASON THAT THAT YOU
KNOW, THERE ARE STILL A COST
THAT GOES INTO PROCESSING
APPLICATIONS, SOME OF THE THE
LANDLORDS, PARTICULARLY THE
LARGER ONES ARE CHARGING
HUNDREDS OF DOLLARS FOR THAT
APPLICATION FEE.
WE KNOW THAT THAT'S MORE THAN
COVERING THEIR COSTS TO PROCESS
THAT APPLICATION.
BUT A LOT OF THE LANDLORDS ARE
USING KIND OF THE SOFTWARE TO
PROCESS IT, PARTICULARLY SOME
OF THE SMALLER LANDLORDS.
AND SO THEY EXPRESS SOME
STRUGGLE WITH WITH CONTINUING
TO COVER THOSE COSTS AGAIN.
>> YOU KNOW, I WOULD ARGUE THAT
THERE ARE VERY FEW OTHER
BUSINESS MODELS WHERE YOU YOU
DON'T PAY TO GO INTO A STORE
EVEN IF YOU DON'T BUY
SOMETHING.
BUT THE REASON THAT WE
PARTICULARLY MADE WE LIMITED
THAT PRETTY LOW BUT THEN ALSO
MADE IT REFUNDABLE WAS BECAUSE
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I THINK
WAS ALSO HAPPENING AND THAT WE
SAW HAPPENING WAS LANDLORDS
TAKING AN ABUNDANCE
OF APPLICATIONS KNOWING THAT
THEY PROBABLY DIDN'T HAVE QUITE
THAT SAME QUANTITY OF OF
APARTMENTS.
AND SO THIS IS AN EFFORT TO
ACTUALLY MAKE SURE THAT
LANDLORDS ARE NOT THAT THEY'RE
BEING HONEST WITH TENANTS WHEN
THEY COME TO APPLY TO SAY LIKE
HEY, YOU'RE PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO GET IN HERE.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE VERY LITTLE
TURNOVER THIS YEAR RATHER THAN
TAKING A TWO OR THREE HUNDRED
DOLLAR APPLICATION FEE
POCKETING AND THEN TELLING THEM
MONTHS LATER THAT THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO HAVE AN APARTMENT.
SO THAT'S WHY MAKING THIS
REFUNDABLE AFTER 60 DAYS WAS
REALLY CRITICAL IF WE WERE
GOING TO KEEP IT IN THERE.
AND SO I JUST WANTED TO ADDRESS
THAT BECAUSE IT IS ONE OF THE
PIECES THAT I GOT THE MOST
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHERE THE
DISCUSSION FOR MY PART WHAT YOU
ALL SAID ON FAVRE POSED IT IS
APPROVED
.
>> DO YOU SEE ONE RESOLUTION TO
APPROVE A LEGAL SERVICES
AGREEMENT WITH GOSSET LLC
RELATIVE TO JENNIFER ALEKSA
JEFF MALONE, TIM RUGG AND
STEPHEN AABA LITIGATION THE
AMOUNT OF 300000 DOLLARS BY
COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN.
>> SECOND MY COUNSELOR IGHER
DISCUSSION OF DC ONE WELL IN
FAVOR OR OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED
YES ONE RESOLUTION TO APPROVE
NEW FEES FOR THE PUBLIC SALE
OF THE CITY FLAG MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER SECOND BY
COUNCIL PERKASIE EDWYN
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF DC ONE
COUNCILMAN
WHICH I'M VERY
EXCITED ABOUT AND I THINK IT'S
GREAT NEW FLAG.
>> I DID HAVE A QUESTION.
>> I THINK IT'S EVIDENT WITHIN
THE MEMO ITSELF BUT THE CHARGE
FOR THE LARGE CITY FLAG SIXTY
FIVE DOLLARS MAKES SENSE.
TEN DOLLARS DOES SEEM A LITTLE
HIGH FOR THIS AND SO IT SAYS
THAT WE ARE YOU KNOW IT'S THE
COST TO PRODUCE IT.
>> BUT I'M JUST CURIOUS IF
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE SORT
OF SHOPPING AROUND FOR
POTENTIALLY LOWER COST OPTIONS
AND IF SOMETHING MIGHT BE
BROUGHT BACK TO US BECAUSE I
CAN'T IMAGINE MAYBE I'M WRONG
MAYBE THERE'S A HUGE RUSH FOR
THIS BUT IS BUJON SO THE FLAGS
WERE PURCHASED BY PUBLIC
SERVICES AFTER FLAG DESIGN WAS
APPROVED AND PROVIDED TO THE
CLERK'S OFFICE AND I DID BASED
THE FEES ON THE COST THAT WAS
ALREADY, YOU KNOW, ACCRUED TO
PROCURE THE FLAGS.
SO I'M HAPPY ONCE WE GO THROUGH
THE STOCK TO YOU KNOW, CONSIDER
A DIFFERENT VENDOR OR OF COURSE
IT WOULD BE COUNSEL'S
DISCRETION TO LOWER THE FEE BUT
THAT THAT IS THE RATE THAT
WOULD RECOVER THE COSTS THAT
HAVE ALREADY BEEN SPENT.
>> YEAH, IT MAKES SENSE TO ME
IN TERMS OF THE CURRENT COST.
I JUST HOPE THAT WE MIGHT LOOK
MAYBE FOR A SLIGHTLY SMALLER
PARADE FLAG THAT MIGHT COST A
LITTLE LESS THAT MIGHT GET IT
OUT MORE BROADLY IN OUR
COMMUNITY FOR THE DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POSED IT IS APPROVED.
>> WE HAVE THE PLEASURE
OF CLOSED SESSION TODAY.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE SUPPORT A
COMMUNICATION PETITION
REFERRALS MAY HAVE A MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE CLERK'S
SUPPORT MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
BECAUSE EDWIN TECHNOLOGY
COUNCIL DENHA DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR POSED IT IS APPROVED
OTHER COMMUNICATIONS TODAY FROM
OUR CITY ATTORNEY.
>> NO THANK YOU, MAYOR.
IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW WE HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE
BY COUNCILMAN GRENELLE SECONDED
BY COUNCILOR IA DISCUSSION ON
FAVOR OPPOSED.
>> WE'RE ADJOURNED